# Video Transcript: 44 Harsh Truths About The Game Of Life - Naval Ravikant (4K)

**Video ID:** KyfUysrNaco
**Channel:** Chris Williamson
**Duration:** 3:16:19
**URL:** https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KyfUysrNaco
**Fetched:** 2026-01-21 08:45:59

---

Happiness is being satisfied with what
you have. Success comes from
dissatisfaction.
Is success worth it then? Oof. I'm not
sure that statement is true anymore.
Like I made that statement a long time
ago and a lot of these things are just
notes to myself and they're highly
contextual. They come in the moment,
they leave in the moment.
Happiness. Okay. So very complicated
topic but I always like the Socrates
story where he goes into the marketplace
and they show him all these luxuries and
fineries and he says how many things
there are in this world that I do not
want right and that's a form of freedom
so not wanting something is as good as
having it in the old story with
Alexander Dionius right Alexander goes
out and conquers the world and he meets
Dionius who's living in a barrel and
Dionius says get out of the way you're
blocking my son and Alexander says oh
how I wish I you know could be like
Dionius the next life and Dionis says
that's the difference I don't wish that
I could sorry Dioynes Dioynes Dioynes
says I I I don't wish to be Alexander so
two paths to happiness and uh one path
is success you get what you want you
satisfy your material needs or like
Dioynes you just don't want in the first
place and I'm not sure which one is more
valid um
and it also depends what you define as
success if the end goal is happiness
then why not cut to the chase and just
go straight for
uh does being happy make you less
successful? That is a conventional
wisdom. That may even be the practical
earned experience of your reality. You
find that when you're happy, you don't
want anything. So, you don't get up and
do anything. On the other hand, you
know, you still got to do something.
You're an animal. You're here. You're
here to survive. You're here to
replicate. You're driven. You're
motivated. You're going to do something.
You're not just going to sit there all
day. Unlikely. Some people do. Maybe
it's in their nature. But I think most
people still want to act. they want to
live in the arena. Uh I found for myself
as I've become uh happier is a big word,
but you know, more peaceful, more calm,
more present, more uh satisfied with
what I have, uh I still want to do
things. I just want to do bigger things.
I want to do things that are more pure,
more aligned with uh what I think needs
to be done and what I can uniquely do.
So in that sense, I think that being
happier can actually make you more
successful, but your definition of
success will likely change along the
way.
Is that a realization you think you
could have gotten to had you have not
had some success in the first place?
At least for me, I always wanted to take
the path of material success first. I
was not going to go be an aesthetic and
sit there and renounce everything. That
just seems too unrealistic and too
painful. Uh, in the story of Buddha, he
starts out as a prince and then he sees
that it's all kind of meaningless
because you're still going to get old
and die and then he goes into the woods
looking for something more.
I'll take the happy route that involves
material success. Thank you.
I think it's quicker in some ways. You
know, one of your uh insights is it's
far easier to achieve our material
desires than it is to renounce them.
And uh
it depends on the person, but I I think
you have to try that path. If you want
something, go get it. Uh, you know, like
I I I quipped that the reason to win the
game is to be free of it. So, you you
play the games, you win the games, and
then you get hopefully you get bored of
the games. You don't want to just keep
looping on the same game over and over.
Although a lot of these games are very
enticing and have many levels and are
relatively open-ended.
Uh, and then you become free of the game
uh in a sense that you're no longer
trying to win it. You know, you can win
it. Uh, and either you move to a
different game or you play the game for
the sheer joy of it.
Yeah. You, another one of yours, most of
the gains in life come from suffering in
the short term so you can get paid in
the long term. I think
that's classic.
Winning the marshmallow test on a daily
basis. But, uh, there's an interesting
challenge where I think people need to
avoid becoming uh, a suffering addict.
Sort of using suffering as the proxy for
progress as opposed to the outcome of
the suffering. Right? It's like I was in
pain not eating the marshmallow. I was
in pain doing this work. I have attached
well-being and satisfaction to pain, not
to what the pain gets me on the other
side of it. If you define pain as
physical pain, then it's a real thing.
It happens and you can't ignore it. But
that's not what we mean by suffering.
Suffering is mostly mental anguish and
mental pain. And it just means you don't
want to do the task at hand. Uh if you
were fine doing the task at hand, then
you wouldn't be suffering. And then the
question is what's more effective to
suffer along the way or just to
interpret it in a way that it's not
suffering?
You hear from a lot of successful people
they look back and they say oh the
journey was the fun part right that was
actually the entertaining part and I
should have enjoyed it more.
It's a common regret. Uh there's a
little thought exercise I like to do,
which is you can go back into your own
life and uh try to put yourself in the
exact position you were in 5 years ago,
10 years ago, 15 years ago, 20 years
ago. And you try to remember, okay, who
was I with? What was I doing? What was I
feeling? What were my emotions? What
were my objectives? And really, really
try to transport yourself back and see
if there's any advice you'd give
yourself. Anything you do differently.
Now, you don't have new information. And
don't pretend you could have gone back
and, you know, bought a stock or bought
bought Bitcoin or whatever, but just
knowing what you know now in terms of
your temperament and a little bit of age
related experience,
how would you have done things
differently? And I think it's a
worthwhile exercise to do. So don't let
me rob you of the conclusion, but I'll
tell you for me uh
I would have done everything the same
except I would have done it with less
anger, less emotion, less internal
suffering because that was optional. It
wasn't necessary.
And I would argue that someone who can
do the job uh at least peacefully but
maybe happily is going to be more
effective than someone who has
unnecessary emotional turmoil.
Well, you end up with a series of
miserable successes, right? The outcome
may have been the same, but the entire
experience of getting there
and and the journey is not only the
reward. The journey is the only thing
there is. You know, even success, it's
human nature to bank it very very
quickly, right? Because the normal loop
that we run through is you sit around,
you're bored, then you want something,
then when you want something, you decide
you're not going to be happy until you
get that thing. Then you start your bout
of suffering or anticipation while you
strive to get that thing. If you get
that thing, then you get used to it and
then you get bored again. Then a few
months later, you want something else.
And if you don't get it, then you're
unhappy for a bit and then you get over
it and then you want something else.
Right? That's the normal cycle. So
whether you're happy or unhappy at the
end, it tends not to last. Now I don't
want to be glib and say that oh there's
no point in making money or being
successful. There absolutely is. Money
solves all your money problems. So it is
good to have money. Um that said there
are those uh those stories. I I don't
know if you've seen those studies. I
don't know how real these are. A lot of
these psych studies don't replicate, but
it's a fun fun little study that shows
that uh people who break their back and
people who win the lottery are back to
their baseline happiness two years
later. Yep. Again, I don't know if
that's entirely true. I think money can
buy you happiness if you earned it
because then along the way you have both
pride and confidence in yourself and you
have a sense of accomplishment and you
you know set out to do something and you
were right. So I I'll bet that lingers
and then as I said money solves your
money problem. So I don't want to be too
glib about it but I would say in general
this this loop that we run through um of
desire, dopamine, fulfillment,
unfulfillment like you you have to enjoy
the journey. The journey is all there
is, right? 99% of your time is spent on
the journey. So, what kind of a journey
is it if you're not going to enjoy it?
How do you shortcut that desire
contract?
You could focus, you could decide that I
don't want most things. I think we have
a lot of unnecessary desires that we
just pick up everywhere. We have
opinions on everything, judgments and
everything. Uh so, I think just knowing
that those are the source of unhappiness
uh will make you be choosy about your
desires. And frankly, if you want to be
successful, you have to be choosy about
your desires. You have to focus.
You can't be great at everything.
You can't be great at everything. You're
just going to waste your energy and
waste your time.
Is fame a worthwhile goal?
Uh, it gets you invited to better
parties,
gets you into better restaurants. Uh,
fame. So, fa fame is this funny thing
where a lot of people know you, but you
don't know them. And, uh, it does get
you put on a pedestal. Uh, it can get
you what you want, uh, at a at a
distance. So, I wouldn't say it's
worthless. Obviously, people want it for
a reason. Um, it's high status, so it
attracts the opposite sex. Uh,
especially for men, it attracts women.
Uh, that said, it is high cost. It means
you have no privacy. Um, you do have
weirdos and lunatics. Uh, you do get hit
up a lot for weird things. Uh, and
you're on a stage, so you're forced to
perform, so you're forced to be
consistent with your past proclamations
and actions, and you're going to have
haters and all that nonsense. But the
fact that we do it, the fact that we all
seem to want it means that it would be
disingenuous to say, "Oh, no, no, I'm
famous." But you don't want to be
famous.
Um, that said, I think fame, like
anything else, is best produced as a or
pursued as a byproduct of something
potentially more worthwhile. Um, wanting
to be famous and craving to be famous
and being famous for being famous, these
are sort of traps.
Fame for fame's sake.
Yeah. Exactly. So, it's better that it's
earned fame. Uh so for example earn
respect in the tribe is you do things
that are good for the tribe. Uh who are
the most famous people in human history?
Uh there uh you know there there are
people who sort of transcended the self.
The Buddhas and the Jesuses and the
Muhammads of the world. Who else is
famous? Uh the artists are famous. You
know art lasts for a long time. The
scientists are famous. They discover
things. The conquerors are famous
presumably because they conquered for
their tribe. There was someone that they
were fighting for. So generally the
higher up you rise by doing things for
greater and greater groups of people
even though it may be considered
tyrannical or negative like uh you know
Jenghaskhan is famous but uh to the
Mongols he was doing good to the rest of
them not so much uh
the higher level you're operating at the
more people you're taking care of the
more you sort of earn respect and fame
and I think those are good reasons to be
famous if if if fame is empty if you're
famous just cuz your name showed up in a
lot of places or your face showed up in
a lot of places then that's a hollow
fame and I think deep down you will know
that and so it'll be fragile and you'll
always be afraid of losing it and then
you'll be forced to perform
so the kind of fame that uh pure actors
and celebrities have I wouldn't want but
the kind of fame that's earned because
you did something useful
uh why dodge that now you can there's a
challenge I think especially if people
make uh very loud public proclamations
about things you mentioned there about
um you're almost hostage to the things
that you used to say that um being able
to update your opinions and change your
mind looks very similar to the internet
as hypocrisy does. No, no, no. The
difference between me saying something
in the past and saying something
different now is perhaps I've learned,
perhaps I've updated my beliefs, but so
few people do it in a legitimate way. I
think that the grifter shill you see
this is the the the smoking gun that
shows that he didn't really believe that
thing all along. Right.
And uh yeah, I I went to a retreat in LA
a couple of years ago and there was a
guy that I used to follow that a big um
business and productivity advice content
creator really really successful and he
just totally stepped back from
everything and went uh like monk mode
and focused on his business. I asked him
why and he said uh I started feeling
like I had to live up to in private the
things that I was saying in public.
Right.
Yeah. It's a it's a what was it that uh
who said it was a mein that um foolish
consistency is a hobgoblin of little
minds right um but essentially look all
life is all learning is error correction
right every knowledge creation system
works through correcting errors making
guesses and correcting errors so by
definition if you're learning you're
going to be wrong most of the time and
you'll be updating your priors and so
for example I did this Joe Rogan podcast
I don't know it's like eight or nine
years ago um and people will call out
like the one thing that didn't turn out
to be correct, right? And it's just like
and they just beat on it because it it
helps them in their mind raise their
status a little bit. Aha, I caught him
in an error. Well, I think if you catch
someone in a blatant lie where there's
believe one thing and they say another,
that's legit. That's a character flaw.
They shouldn't be lying. But on the
other hand, if they just made a guess at
something and they got it wrong. And by
the way, mostly it's about the AI AGI
thing. And I think I'm still right about
that, but it's a different story. Um
people who think we have achieved AGI
just fail a touring test from their
side. Um but uh
it's funny how people latch on to single
proclamations. But the reality is all of
us are dynamical systems. We're always
changing. We're always learning. We're
always growing. And uh hopefully we're
correcting errors. What you don't want
to be doing is lying in public so that
because you're you're trying to look
good. And I think people can smell that.
I I I what this world really lacks right
now is authenticity and because
everybody wants something. They want to
be seen as something. They want to be
something that they're not. And so you
do catch a lot of people uh saying
things that they don't really believe.
And I think people are very sensitive to
that.
Uh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] radars have become hypers
sensitized to try and work out whether
or not this person means the thing that
they're saying.
Yeah. I mean they they a lot of people
are wrong. Most of us are wrong most of
the time especially in any new endeavor.
Difference between being wrong and
disingenuous though, purposefully wrong.
Correct. Exactly. So I think I think
that's the big difference. If someone is
wrong, no big deal. As long as they have
a genuine reason for saying what they're
saying, or believing what they're
believing. But if they are lying to
elevate their status or their appearance
or to live up to some expectation,
that's the mistake. And that's a mistake
not just for the listener, it's a
mistake for themselves cuz then you're
going to get trapped in a hall of
mirrors. You yourself are going to be
consistent with your past proclamations.
So if you're lying to others, you're
going to be lying to yourself. You're
puppeted by a person that you are not
even.
That's right. Yeah. It's it's like what
was that line? There's you're you're
basically trying to impress people who
you know don't care about you. Um so
they don't like the real you and if they
saw the real you they wouldn't care and
the people who would like the real you
don't get to see the real you so they
pass you by
right? You only want the respect of the
very very few people that you respect.
Uh trying to demand respect from the
masses is a fool's errand.
status games, the allure of acrewing,
whether it's fame, actual fame, or just
the competition comparison trap, it's
always there. Uh there's a real draw of
being swayed by social approval. How
should people learn to get less
distracted by status games in that way?
I think it it just helps to see that
status games don't matter as much as
they used to. uh in old society, let's
go back hunter gatherer times, there was
no such thing as wealth. You just had
what you could carry. Um there was no
stored wealth. So wealth games didn't
really exist to wealth creation games.
All that existed was status games. If
you were high status, then you got what
little was available first. Um but even
back then, you had to earn your status
by taking care of the tribe. Uh now we
have wealth creation where you can
actually create a product or a service.
you can scale that product or service
and you can provide abundance for a lot
of people. Uh and that's not zero sum,
that's a positive sum game. I can be
wealthy, you can be wealthy, we can
create things together and clearly since
we are all collectively far far
wealthier than we were in huntergatherer
times. Uh wealth creation is positive
but status is limited. There's limited
status to go around. It's a ranking
ladder. It's a hierarchy. And so it's a
rise in status. Somebody else has a
lower in status. Now you can have
multiple kinds of status. So you can
expand some kinds of status, but it's
not like wealth creation where it can go
infinitely where we can all be, you
know, living in the stars and moon bases
or Mars colonies or what have you. So
just realize that status games are
inherently limited. Uh they're always
combative. Um they always require uh
direct combat whereas uh wealth creation
games can be just you're creating
products. You don't have to fight
anybody else. Yes, in the marketplace
your product has to succeed, but that's
not quite the same as uh invective
against other people or being angry with
other people or feeling pushed down or
pushed up or having a beef with
somebody.
So, I would argue that wealth creation
games are both more pleasant. Uh they're
positive sum and they actually have uh
concrete material returns. If you have
more money, you can buy more.
Show me where you can exchange your
status at the bank.
Exactly. Yeah. It's it's it's vague and
it's fuzzy. Now, you see people get
rich, they have money, what do they
want? They want status. So they go to
Hollywood, start starring in movies,
they donate to nonprofits, they go to KS
or Davos or what have you. Um, and they
start trying to trade the money for
status. So, you know, people always want
what they don't have. Uh, and we are
evolutionarily hardwired for status
because as I said, wealth creation
didn't really exist until the
agricultural revolution, uh, when you
could store grain and then the
industrial revolution took it to another
level and now the information age is
taking it to yet another level.
But there's never been an easier time to
make money. Yes, it's still hard, but
there's never been an easier time to
create wealth because there's so much
leverage out there. There's so much
opportunity. You still have to go find
it. It's not easy. It's not going to
fall on your lap, and you have to learn
something and know something and do
something interesting. But nevertheless,
it's possible to many more people.
A few hundred years ago, you were born a
surf, you were going to die a surf.
There was almost no way out of that.
That's changed. And so I would argue
that you're better off focusing on
wealth games and status games. If you're
trying to um build up, for example, your
following on a social network and get
famous and then get rich off of being
famous, that's a much harder path than
getting rich first.
Um and then go for your fame afterwards
would be my advice.
Well, a lot of people do that as you
said. It's funny how uh people who have
achieved such a level of wealth that you
don't think why do you need the status
given that most people use status to
then try and cash in to achieve wealth
if you've achieved [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] money already
if you're post money or uh asset heavy
as it's known. Um why are you trying to
go in the other direction? Well, as you
said because we've we've got an
illustrious history biologically of
wanting status and wealth is kind of
novel.
It's new. It's new. Wealth is uh
something that you have to understand
more intellectually. Yeah, there's a
physical component, more food, more
survival, but uh to truly understand the
effects and the powers and the abilities
and limitations uh and the advantages
and disadvantages of wealth, you have to
use your neoortex a lot more.
Does that mean
it's not limbic?
The reason to play the game is to win
the game and be done with it is harder
to win and be done with for status than
it is for wealth.
That's a good observation. I had thought
that through, but you're right. Yeah, I
think that's right. I think you people
will always want more status. Uh but I
think you can be satisfied at a certain
level of wealth. Well, as well
you always have this sort of sense. This
is what leaderboards are, right? This is
the the billboard chart, right? And it
is zero sum and it is
I guess you know the Forbes richest
people on the planet thing.
That one's harder to climb the ladder
on. But uh the fact that for example
iTunes and YouTube can put you in
competition against your contemporaries
every single day and make you go up and
down and show you likes and comments and
ratings. This is how much you're up.
Exactly. They they keep you running on
that treadmill forever.
Jimmy Carr has this cool idea where he
says trajectory is more important than
position.
So if you are number 101 in the world
but last year you were number 200 versus
you're number two in the world but last
year you were number one. there is this
sense of the deceleration is very very
tangible and um it's
again it goes back to evolution you know
something that is bleeding eventually
dies unless you stop the bleeding so
you're you're hardwired not to lose what
you have and because we evolve in
conditions where we're so close to just
not surviving uh you don't want to give
anything up. It's hardwired into us to
not give anything up.
So you grip tightly.
That's right. If you struggle to stay
asleep because your body gets too hot or
too cold, this is going to help. Just
add an EightLe Pod 4 Ultra to your
mattress like a fitted sheet and it will
automatically cool down or warm up each
side of your bed up to 20°. It's got
integrated sensors that track your sleep
time, your sleep phases, your HRV, your
snoring, and your heart rate with 99%
accuracy. It even starts cooling or
heating your bed an hour before you get
into it. That is why eight has been
clinically proven to increase total
sleep up to 1 hour every night. Best of
all, they've got a 30-day sleep trial,
so you can buy it and sleep on it for 29
nights, and if you don't like it, they
will give you your money back. Plus,
they ship internationally. Right now,
you can get $350 off the Pod4 Ultra by
going to the link in the description
below or heading to
8LE.com/modernwisdism
and using the code modernwisdom a
checkout. That's eigle.com/modernwisdom
and modernwisdom a checkout. The worst
outcome in the world is not having
self-esteem.
Why? Yeah, that's a tough one. Uh, well,
I I I look at the people and I don't
want to offend anybody, but I look at
the people who don't like themselves,
and that's the toughest slot because
they're always wrestling with
themselves, and it's hard enough to face
the outside world. Um, and no one's
going to like you more than you like
yourself. So, if you're struggling with
yourself, then the outside world becomes
an insurmountable challenge. And it's
hard to say why people have low
self-esteem. It might be genetic. It
might just be circumstantial. A lot of
times I think it's cuz they just weren't
unconditionally loved as a child and
that sort of seeps in at a deep core
level. Um but self-esteem issues can be
the most limiting. Uh one interesting
thought is that you know to some extent
self-esteem is a reputation you have
with yourself. Um you're watching
yourself at all times. You know what
you're doing and you have your own moral
code. Everyone has a different moral
code. But if you don't live up to your
own moral code, the same code that you
hold others to, uh it will damage your
self-esteem. So perhaps one way to build
up your self-esteem is to live up to
your own code very rigorously. Have one
and then live up to it. Uh another way
to raise your self-esteem might be to do
things for others. Uh if I look back on
my life and you know what are the
moments that I'm actually proud of,
there's very far and few between and
it's not that often and it's not the
things you would expect. It's not the
material success. It's not having
learned this thing or that. It's when I
made a sacrifice for somebody or
something that I loved. And uh that's
when I'm actually ironically most proud.
Now that's through an explicit mental
exercise. But I'll bet you at some level
I'm recording that implicitly. So that
tells me that even if I am not being
loved and the way to create love is to
give love to to express love through
sacrifice and through duty.
And so I think doing things like that
can build up your self-esteem really
fast. It's interesting when you talk
about sacrifice because a lot of the
time people say, "I sacrificed so much
for my job." It's like, "Yeah, but that
was you sacrificing something that you
wanted less for something that you
wanted more as opposed to genuinely
taking some sort of cost." And uh yeah,
I wonder whether if self-esteem is you
adhering to your internal your your
actions and your values aligning um even
when it's difficult or perhaps even more
so when it's difficult. I wonder whether
there is a price that people who are
more introspective, high integrity pay
because you think well you've got this
uh
heavy set of overheads that you need to
pay in some way.
Well, if being ethical were profitable,
everybody would do it, right? So, uh you
at some level it does involve a
sacrifice. Uh but that sacrifice can
also be thought of as you're thinking
for the long term rather than the short
term. Um for example the virtues are the
set of uh virtues a set of beliefs that
if everybody in society followed them as
individuals it would lead to win-win
outcomes for everybody. So if I am
honest and you are honest then we can do
business more easily. We can interact
more easily because we can trust each
other. So even though there might be a
few liars in the system as long as there
aren't too many liars and too many
cheaters uh a high trust society where
everybody's honest is better off. And I
think a lot of the virtues work this way
right? If I don't go around sleeping
with your wife and you don't sleep with
mine and you know if I don't take all
the food that's at the table first and
so on, then we all get along better and
we can play win-win games. Uh in game
theory, the most famous game is
prisoners dilemma. But that's all about
everybody cheating and the Nash
equilibrium. The stable equilibrium
there is everybody cheats and you're for
the only way you can be you can play a
win-win game is if you have long-term
iterated moves. But that's not actually
the most common game played in society.
The most common game played as one
called a stags hunt where if we
cooperate, we can bring down a big stag
and both have big dinners, but if we
don't cooperate, then we have to go hunt
like rabbits and we each have small
dinners.
So most of uh and and that game has two
stable equilibriums. And one could be
where we're both hunting the rabbit and
one could be where we're hunting the
stag. So the high trust society is a
more most more virtuous society where I
can trust you to come hunt the stag with
me and show up on time and do the work
and divide it up properly. So you want
to live in a system where everybody has
their own set of virtues and follows
them and then we all win. But I would
argue you don't need to do that for
sacrifice. You don't need to do that for
other people. You can do it just purely
for yourself. You will have higher
self-esteem. You will attract other high
virtue people.
Would I go on a stag hunt with me?
Correct. Yeah, that's right. And if
you're the kind of person, if you're the
kind of person who long-term signals
ethics and virtues, then you will
attract other people who are ethical and
virtuous. Whereas, if you are a shark,
you will eventually find yourself
swimming entirely amongst sharks. And
that's an unpleasant existence. But
again, this goes back to the equivalent
of the marshmallow test. And by the way,
the marshmallow test does not replicate.
I saw it replication crisis hard
recently.
But it is about trading off the short
term for the long term. Uh, and so I
think for a lot of these so-called
virtues, there are long-term selfish
reasons to be virtuous.
Yeah. Uh, did you deal with self-doubt
in the past? Is that something that was
a hurdle for you to overcome?
Yes and no. I think I I dealt with
self-doubt in the sense that, oh, I
don't know what I'm doing and I need to
figure it out. Um, but I didn't doubt
myself in the way of somebody else knows
better than me for me or that, you know,
I'm an idiot or I'm not worthwhile or
anything that I I guess I had the
benefit of I grew up with a lot of love
like the people around me love me
unconditionally. And so that just gave
me a lot of confidence. Uh, not the kind
of confidence that would say I have the
answer, but the kind of confidence that
I will figure it out and I know what I
want or only I am a good arbiter of what
I want.
Yeah. That level of self-belief, I
suppose, allows you to determine what is
it that matters to me, my self-esteem,
should I chase this thing or not? I can
make a fair judgment on that as opposed
to being so swayed. But it's such a good
point about even if you think you're not
consciously logging the stuff that
you're doing, there is some that's in
the back of your mind. Was it the Damon?
Is that what the ancient Greeks or
something used to talk about?
Yeah. The Yeah. Also in computer science
like there's a concept of a demon which
is a uh a program that's always running
in the background. You can't see it.
Okay.
Um but yeah, it probably comes from the
ancient Greek demon. Uh but yeah, I what
you know that you don't even know you
know is far greater than what you know
you know, right? You can't even
articulate most of the things you know.
There are feelings you have that have no
words for them. There are thoughts you
have that are felt within the body or
subconsciously that you never articulate
to yourself. You don't really you can't
articulate the rules of grammar yet you
exercise them effortlessly when you
speak. So I would argue that your
implicit knowledge and your knowledge
that is unknown to yourself is far
greater than the knowledge you can
articulate and that you can communicate.
And
so at some level you're always watching
yourself. That's what your consciousness
is, right? It's the thing that's
watching everything including your mind,
including your body. M
so if you want to uh have high
self-esteem then earn your own
selfrespect.
I had this idea the internal golden
rule. So the golden rule says treat
others the way that you should be
treated. You want to be treated. The
internal golden rule says treat yourself
like others should have treated you
and it was a a repost to maybe people
that didn't grow up with unconditional
love. Yeah.
In that way. On the love thing, one of
the interesting things about love is you
can try to remember the feeling of being
loved. So go back to when someone was in
love with you or someone did love you
and like really remember that feeling
like really sit with it and try to
recreate it within yourself and then go
to the feeling of you loving someone and
when you were in love. And I'm not even
talking about romantic love necessarily.
So be a little careful there. I'm
talking more about like love for
it can sometimes get complex if you're
talking about past romantic love,
right? a sibling or a child or something
like that or or a parent and uh think
about when you felt love towards someone
or something. And now which is better?
And I would argue that the feeling of
being in love is actually more
exhilarating than the feeling of being
loved. Being loved is a little clawing.
It's a little too sweet. You kind of
want to push the person away. It's a
little embarrassing. And you know that
if that person is too much into it that
you feel constrained. On the other hand,
the feeling of being in love is very
expansive. It's very open. It actually
makes you a better version of yourself.
It makes you want to be a better person.
And so you can create love anytime you
want. It's just that craving to receive
it. That's the problem.
The most expensive trait is pride. How
come?
Oh, that was a recent one. Uh I I
tweeted that just because I think that
uh pride is the enemy of learning. So
when I look at my friends and
colleagues, the ones who are still stuck
in the past and have grown the least are
the ones who were the proudest because
they sort of feel like they already had
the answers. And so they don't want to
correct themselves publicly. And so this
goes back to the fame conversation. You
get locked into something you said. It
made you famous. You're known for that.
And now you want to pivot or change.
So pride prevents you from saying I'm
wrong. It
What's pride in this context here?
It could be as simple as you're trading
stocks and then you don't admit you were
wrong. So you hang on to a lousy trait.
Uh it could be that you uh made a
decision to uh you know marry someone or
move somewhere or enter a profession, it
doesn't work out and then you don't want
to admit that you were wrong so you get
stuck in it. Uh it's mostly about
getting trapped in local maxima as
opposed to going back down and climbing
up the mountain again.
Mhm. And that's why it's an expensive
trade because you continue to need to
repay it in one form or another.
Yeah. You're you're just stuck at a
suboptimal point. Uh it's going to cost
you money. it's going to cost you
success
and time
and time. Uh the great artists always
have this ability to start over whether
it's Paul Simon or Madonna or you two
and I'm dating myself a little bit. Um
but even the great entrepreneurs,
they're just always willing to start
over. Uh I'm always struck by the Elon
Musk story where, you know, he uh he did
PayPal as X.com originally. Actually, it
was his his financial institution that
got merged into PayPal.
It's good that you've got the domain.
You know what I mean?
Yeah, exactly. I'll park that. I'll hold
on.
He's consistent. He's been using it for
quite a while. Um, and he said something
like along the lines of, uh, I made $200
million from the sale of PayPal. I put
$100 million into SpaceX, 80 million
Tesla, 20 into Solar City, and I had to
borrow money for rent. Right? This guy
is a perennial risk taker. He's always
willing to start over. He doesn't have
any pride about being seen as successful
or being seen as a failure. He's willing
to put it all in.
Back himself again each time.
Back himself again each time. But the
key thing is he's always willing to
start over, right? even now when he's
sort of made his his new startup is a
USA, right? He's basically trying to fix
it like he would fix one of his
startups. And I think that is a
willingness to look like a fool and that
is a willingness to start over. And a
lot of people just don't have that. They
become successful or they become rich or
they become famous and that's it.
They're stuck. They don't want to go
back to zero. And creating anything
great requires zero to one. And that
means you go back to zero and that's
really painful and hard to do. Talking
about risk, something I've been thinking
about a lot to do with you. Any moment
when you're not having a good time, when
you're not really happy, you're not
doing anyone any favors. I think lots of
people have become
unusually familiar with suffering
silently in that sort of a way of not
having
a high bar for your expectation for
quality of life. Uh yeah, a lot of it is
just you're memeing yourself into a bad
outcome because you think that somehow
suffering is glorious or that it makes
you a better person or you know my old
quip was if you're so smart why aren't
you happy? Why can't you figure that one
out? Um the reality is you can be smart
and happy. There are plenty of people in
human history who are smart and happy.
Uh and I think it just starts with
saying yeah you know what I'm I'm going
to be happy. There was a guy that I met
in Thailand a long time ago and uh he
used to work for Tony Robbins. uh you
know he had a great attitude and uh we
were sitting around and he said you know
uh he said I realized one day that
someone out there had to be the happiest
person in the world like there just that
person just has to exist he said why not
me I'll take on that burden I'll be that
guy and I heard that I was like wow
that's pretty good that's a good frame
right he knew how to reframe things
and so I think a lot of happiness is
just a choice uh in the sense that you
make first you just identify yourself as
actually I'm going be a person that's
going to be happy. I'm going to figure
it out. And you just figure it out along
the way. You're not going to lose your
other predilictions. You're not going to
lose your ambition or your desire for
success. I think a lot of people have
this fear that, oh, if I'm happy, then I
won't want to be successful. No, you'll
just want to do things that are more
aligned with the happy version of you,
and you'll be successful at those
things. And believe me, the happy
version of you is not going to look back
at the unhappy version and say, "Oh man,
that that guy was going to be more
success. I wish I was him."
You're actually trying to be successful
so you'll be happy. That's the whole
point. you have you've gotten it
backwards.
You you unlocked one of my trap cards.
Um, one of my favorite insights is that
we sacrifice the thing we want for the
thing that's supposed to get it.
So, we sacrifice happiness in order to
be successful so that when we're finally
sufficiently successful, we can actually
be happy. And if you have some sort of
simultaneous equation and you just sort
of stripped success off from both sides,
the at least in my own life, I have not
found there to be a trade-off. If
anything, I have found that the happier
I get, the more I am going to do the
things that I'm good at and aligned with
and that will make me even happier. And
so, I actually end up more successful,
not less. The aligned with thing is
interesting. Uh, I'm going to try and
put this across as delicately as I can.
I would say from the bit of time that
we'd spent together, you have a really
interesting trait of
holistic selfishness. Uh, you're sort of
prepared to put yourself first. um you
seem largely unfazed by saying or doing
things that might might result in other
people feeling a little bit awkward if
it's truthful for you. Uh it's like
unapologetically self-prioritizing, I
guess. Yeah, I think everybody is. Uh
maybe unapologetic is the part that's
that's relatively uh rare, but I think
everybody puts themselves first. That's
just human nature. You're you're here
because you survive. You're a separate
organism.
That's interesting. I'm maybe. But I
know we like to virtue signal and
pretend we're doing it for each other.
How many how many times does somebody
say, "Yeah, of course. I'd love to come
to the wedding." They're like, "I don't
want to be at the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] wedding." How
many times does someone say, "How are
you doing today?" And they don't tell
you. How many
I don't go to weddings.
But this is my point.
So I don't think you're necessarily
right with that. I think that people do
I don't think they put themselves first.
I sometimes think that they they
compromise what it is that they want in
order to appease socially what's in
front of them.
Yeah. I just view it as you're wast
everyone's wasting their time on it. Um,
don't do something you don't want to do.
Why Why are you wasting your time?
There's so little time on this earth.
Life goes fast. What is it? 4,000 weeks.
That's your lifespan. Um, and and yes,
we hear that, but we don't remember it.
But, uh, I guess I'm keenly aware of how
little time I have, so I'm just not
going to waste it. How have you got more
comfortable at um,
being the unapologetic self-
prioritizer?
Yeah, I've gotten I've gotten utterly
more and more ruthless on it. Ma mainly
it's that I see or hear people's freedom
and then that liberates me further. So I
read a uh I read a blog post by uh P
Mark aka Mark Andre where he said don't
keep a schedule and I took that to
heart. So I deleted my calendar and I
don't keep a schedule. I try to remember
it all in my head. If I can't remember
it, I'm not going to add
I'm glad you got here on time.
Yeah, exactly. Um
I hate to look things up at the last
minute. Mhm.
Uh so, but ironically, I don't even know
if Mark himself follows that, but he
made the correct point. Uh I read a
little story about Jack Dorsey doing all
his business off his uh iPhone and iPad
and not even going into a Mac, and I
said, "Okay, I want to do that." So, I'm
going to operate through text messaging
and not put up my nasty email.
Does that feel like more freedom?
It does. Yeah. Cuz you're on the go. Um
so, I have a nasty email autoresponder
that says, "I don't check email and
don't text me either." Right. If you
need to find me, you'll find me.
Obviously, some of this is a luxury of
success, but some of these habits I
adopted long before actually the hostile
email autoresponder started a long time
ago. Um, I used to own the domain. I let
it go. I don't do coffee.com. I used to
reply from that email uh just so people
would get the point. But I stopped being
rude about it. Now I just ghost. I just
disappear. Um, my wife knows not to ever
uh book or schedule me for anything. Uh,
I'm not expect I'm not expected to go to
couples dinners. I'm not expect to go to
birthdays. I'm not expect to go to
weddings. If somebody tries to rope her
into having me show up, she says he
makes his own decisions. You got to ask
him directly.
What about vice
versa? Well, are you not killing
serendipity in a way that
No, no. I'm freeing up all my time. So,
my entire life is serendipity. I get to
interact with whoever I want, whenever I
want, wherever.
You'll hear the invite, but make the
decision because if you're if there's
fewer things in coming, you're assuming
that you know what's best for you to
anything in the future. So, I'll say,
"Okay, if that thing is interesting,
I'll see if I can get in that day when
I'm in the mood." But there's nothing
worse than something coming up that your
past self committed you to that your
present self doesn't want to do.
God damn it.
Past. Yeah. And then it destroys your
entire calendar. It destroys your your
day because there's like, oh, this 1
hour slot which is sitting like a turd
on my calendar that I have to like
schedule my whole day around. I can't do
anything the 20 minutes before, the 20
minutes afterwards.
Even for phone calls, if someone wants
to do a phone call, say, "Okay, just
text me when you're free. I'll text you
when I'm free." and we'll just do it on
the fly. It's a much better way of
living than this overly scheduled uh you
know cal.com or iical whatever.
The uh the overscheduled life is not
worth living.
It's not. I think it's a terrible way to
live life. That's not how we evolved.
It's not how we grew up. Um it's not how
how we were as children hopefully uh
unless you're a helicopter parent or a
tiger mom.
Um
your natural order is freedom. Uh I had
a friend who uh said to me once, you
know, uh I never want to have to be at a
specific place at a specific time. And I
was like, "Oh my god, that's freedom."
When I heard that, that changed my life
right there.
You still arm alarm clockless?
Yes, I'm alarm clockless. Today, I did
set my alarm clock just so I wouldn't
miss this.
Very important. Yeah. If you still,
but just so you know, I set the alarm
clock from 11:00 a.m. in case I was
stricken with a flu that day. I wasn't
going to set my alarm clock for 8:00
a.m. or 9:00 a.m. And sure enough, I got
up many hours before that.
Um, but it was sort of a backup
emergency alarm. In fact, sometimes when
I something
that I need to do, I don't want to look
at a calendar, so I'll just set an alarm
for it.
Just sink a little bit more into that
like kind of that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you energy, that
self- prioritizing energy because I
think people rationally love the idea of
this. I'm going to do what only I want
to do. uh even if they've got the level
of freedom,
it's not [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you energy in the sense
that I think everyone should live their
life that way to the greatest extent
possible. Obviously, we have our
requirements around work and obligations
that are genuinely important to us. But
don't fritter away your life on randomly
scheduled things and things that aren't
important don't matter and events and
weddings and you know tedious dinners
with tedious people that you don't want
to go to. To the extent you can bring
freedom into your life, optimize for
that, you'll actually be more
productive. You won't just be happier
and more free. You will be more
productive because then you can focus on
what is in front of you, whatever the
biggest problem of that day. When I wake
up in the morning, uh the first 4 hours
are when I have the most energy and
that's when I want to solve all the hard
problems. And the next 4 hours are when
I kind of want to, you know, do some
more outdoorsy activities or I want to
work out or maybe I can, you know, have
some meetings, but I'll try to do those
last second based on whatever the day's
priorities demand. the last 4 hours I
kind of want to wind down. I want to
hang out with the kids and I want to
play games or read a book or something
like that.
So having that flexibility and freedom
is really important. So you can just put
whatever is most needed into the slot at
that moment. Uh and instead if I have
like a meeting at 2 p.m. and then I have
to like get a thing and some emails
done, I put that off till 6 p.m. I'm
rushing. I'm not going to be productive.
I'm not going to be uh
You're certainly not free.
You're not I'm definitely not free. But
also another thing that I really believe
is that inspiration is perishable. Act
on it immediately. So when you're
inspired to do something, do that thing.
If I'm inspired to write a blog post, I
want to do it at that moment. If I'm
inspired to send a tweet, I want to do
it at that moment. If I'm inspired to
solve a problem, I do it that moment. If
I'm inspired to read a book, I want to
read it right then. If I'm inspired to
solve a problem, I solve it right there.
If I want to learn something, I I do it
at the moment of curiosity. The moment
the curiosity arrives, I go learn that
thing immediately. I download the book.
I get on Google. I get on ChatGpt,
whatever. I will figure that thing out
on the spot and that's when the learning
happens. It doesn't happen because I've
scheduled time because I've set an hour
aside because when that time arrives I
might be in a different mood. I might
just want to do something different.
So I think that spontaneity is really
important. You're going to learn best
when you're having fun when you
generally are enjoying the process not
when you're forced to sit there and do
it. How much do you remember from
school? You know you were forced to
learn geography, history, mathematics on
this schedule at this time according to
this person. Didn't happen. All the
stuff that sticks with you is you
learned it when you wanted to, when you
genuinely had the desire. And that
freedom, that ability to act on
something the moment you want to is so
liberating that most of us go through
our lives with very very little tastes
of that. If you live your entire life
that way, that is a recipe for
happiness.
It feels like efficiency that that you
have
efficient also.
You have the inspiration that is going
to be the most frictionless time to ever
do that particular task. So, oh, I've
had the inspiration to do that. I'll put
that off until a time when I no longer
really want to do it quite so much. And
while I do want to do that thing, I'll
do something else that I needed to do
because it's on the schedule.
It does not work. Procrastination is
because you don't want to do that thing
right now. You want to do something
else. Go do that something else. I
reject this frame that efficiency and
productivity and success are counter to
happiness and freedom. They actually go
together.
How so?
The happier you are, the more you can
sustain doing something, the more likely
you're going to do something that will
in turn make you even happier. and
you'll continue to do it and you'll
outwork everybody else. The more free
you are, the better you can allocate
your time and the less you're caught up
in a web of obligations and commitments
and the more you can focus on the task
at hand. In other news, this episode is
brought to you by Function. Staying on
top of your health requires more than
just an annual physical, which is why I
partnered with Function. They run lab
tests twice a year to track over a 100
biomarkers and monitor for early signs
of thousands of diseases. They even
screen for 50 types of cancer at stage
one, which is five times more data than
you get from an annual physical. You
receive insights from a team of expert
physicians who provide a detailed
written clinician summary of all their
observations and then phone
consultations for any critical findings.
Getting these lab tests done would
usually cost thousands, but with
function, it is only $499.
And right now, you can get the exact
same blood panels that I get and bypass
their weight list by going to the link
in the description below or heading to
functionhealth.com/modernwisdom.
That's functionhealth.com/modernwisdism.
This is related to another insight of
yours. The less you want something, the
less you're thinking about it, the less
you're obsessing over it, the more
you're going to do it in a natural way,
the more you're going to do it for
yourself, you're going to do it in a way
that you're good at and you're going to
stick with it. The people around you
will see the quality of your work is
higher. But this seems like a difficult
tension to navigate because an obsessive
attention to detail is a competitive
advantage of your work as well. So you
have these two things sort of
conflicting with each other. No one is
going to beat you at being you if it So
one of the things I like to say is like
find what feels like play to you but
looks like work to others. So it looks
like work to them but to you it feels
like play. It's not work. So you're
going to out compete them because you're
doing it effortlessly. You're doing it
for fun. They're doing it for work.
They're doing it for some byproduct. To
you it's art. It's beauty. It's joy.
It's it's flow. It's fulfilling. Uh, you
must enjoy podcasting. If you didn't,
you wouldn't be good at it. You would
either, right? If you would, you if if
you decided that the right way to get
ahead in life was to go write books, you
would nobody would have heard of you.
Chris Williamson's book would be a
complete flop. That's not who you are.
You're a podcaster. You enjoy talking to
people. You enjoy interviewing them. The
more you do things that are natural to
you, the less competition you have. You
escape competition through authenticity.
by being your own self. If I had to
summarize how to be successful in life
in two words, I would just say
productize yourself. That's it. Just
figure out what it is that you naturally
do that the world might want that you
can scale up and turn into a product and
it'll be it'll eventually be effortless
for you. Yes, there's always work
required, but it won't even feel like
work to you. It'll feel like play to
you. And modern society gives us that
opportunity. You know, if you were 2,000
years ago, you're born in a farm. Your
choices are very limited, right? You're
going to do stuff on that farm. Now, you
can literally wake up and you can move
to a different city. You can switch
careers. You can switch jobs. You can
change the people that you're with. Uh,
you know, you can change so many things
about who you are and who you're with
and what you're doing that there is
infinite opportunity out there for you.
Literally infinite. And so it's much
better to treat this like a search
function to find the people who need you
the most, to find the work that needs
you the most, to find the place you're
best suited to be at. And it's
worthwhile to spend time in that
exploration before diving into
exploitation. The biggest mistake in a
world with so many choices is premature
commitment. If you prematurely commit to
being a lawyer or a doctor and now
you've got like, you know, 5 years
invested into that, you might have just
completely missed. You might just end up
in the wrong profession, the wrong
place, or the wrong people for 30 years
of your life grinding away. And yes, the
best time to figure that out was before,
but the second best time is now. So,
just change it.
And also, presumably kill things that
aren't working very quickly.
By default, you should kill everything.
You know, if you can't decide, the
answer is no. Uh, and most things you
should just be saying no to. The part of
my keeping my calendar free is just by
default saying no to everything. Do I
want to create a calendar just to add
your event, right? Or to add your need
or your desire. One of the other things
about, you know, early on in life,
you're looking for opportunities. So,
you're saying yes to everything. And
that is a phase that you go through.
That is the exploration phase. Later,
when you found the thing you want to
work on, you're in the exploitation
phase. You have to say no to everything
by default. And if you don't say no to
everything by default, if you have to
even explicitly go out of your way to
say no to something, that will take up
time. Uh, for example, you know, there
there are a lot of people out there who
are into hustle culture and and a big
piece of hustle culture is like, well,
you're not going to get something if you
don't ask for it. So, they'll hustle
people. They'll always be sending you
requests, messages. Yeah, this is a
famous person problem, but I have it.
And people are always asking me for
things. And I kind of squirm when I get
these messages, and I'm sure you get
these two text messages, emails saying,
"Hey, Chris, my friend so and so should
really be on your podcast, or you should
come to my event. You should write a
forward for my book." And you kind of
squirm when you get this, right? You
have to figure out how to say no. And
one of the things I learned along the
way is that if you wouldn't ask somebody
else to do it and then you get that
request yourself, you can just dismiss
it. You don't have to respond. You don't
you don't even let let it enter your
brain. You have to be able to delete
emails and text messages without
flinching if you want to scale. And
scaling is very important. Scaling your
time is really important. Every
interruption will take you out of flow.
So the only way you can remain in flow
is if you get either very good at
ignoring these things by default or
closing yourself off like a hermit like
our mutual friend Tim Ferris does or you
just become emotionally capable of not
registering these as something that
causes turbulence inside of you.
That not registering it emotionally
thing is that uh
it's fundamental. That's so fundamental
to so many things in life.
Okay. Can we dig into that a little bit?
is because again I've only seen you as
you right I didn't know you 20 years ago
I didn't know you as a child um so I've
only seen you with this
holistic selfishness the in integrated
self- prioritization whatever we I don't
know what we called it
selfish is fine I'll take selfish I'm
selfish I'm very selfish person don't
contact me
uh yeah that emotional reaction I also
get the sense too that
maybe people have lived obligation life
for so long that they actually kind of
struggle to tap into what it is that
they want. They've hidden their wants
and their desires and their needs and
they've dep prioritized themselves so
much for so long they go, "What do I
want actually? What what is it? Do I
want to go to this thing or not?"
Because all I've done is be [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
puppeted, right? I've been marionetted
by other people's desires for so so so
long. I can't even tap into that
anymore. And saying no feels like a war
crime. So, so I think it's really good
to be able to view your own mind and
your own thoughts objectively and that
is the big benefit of meditation. It
creates a small gap between your
conscious observation self and your mind
and that lets you then look at your
thoughts and evaluate them a little bit
like you would a third party's
statements. And uh if you just take your
mind to be you and they're integrated in
one and the same at all times and you're
reacting from the mind, then you're not
even going to question things that come
into your mind. Anything that comes in
that creates a reaction will immediately
create a reaction. But if you can
observe your thoughts a little bit and
not in some woo way, but you can even
just do it through therapy, you can do
it through journaling, you can do it any
way you would like, you can just take
long walks, you don't have to meditate
and do lotus position. uh all that is
unnecessary. But if you can observe your
own thoughts and view them a little
objectively, then you can start being uh
a little more choosy, a little more
critical and you can realize that there
are no problems in the real world other
than maybe things that inflict pain on
your body. Everything else has to become
a problem in your mind first. You have
to view it and interpret it and create a
narrative that it is a problem before it
becomes a problem. And then you realize
that a lot of your emotional energy is
spent on reacting to things that your
mind is automatically saying are
problems. Uh and you don't need all
those problems. Do you really need that
many problems in your life? Again, I
would say try to focus on just one
overarching problem and then go solve
that problem. It's like if you want to
be successful, define success very
concretely. Focus on that. In everything
else, when it enters your mind, it
becomes a problem. Whether it's a
judgment about the girl walking down the
street or the car that just cut in front
of you or whether it's like you know
this your accountant did this stupid
thing like yes it's going to trigger you
but observe for a moment that like it's
triggering me. I've created a problem.
Do I really want to have this problem
right now? Do I want to spend the energy
on this problem or do I want that going
somewhere else? And it it doesn't have
to be that overt. You don't have to the
mind mud wrestling with itself is also a
problem but because it loves to do that.
I have my problems have got problems and
I have a real problem about fixing my
problems.
Yeah. Exactly. So you just you're going
to be much happier and much more
focused. Again, I think happiness and
focus and success can kind of complement
each other. You're going to have much
more energy. Just think about as mental
energy. You have much more mental energy
to focus on the actual problems you want
to solve if you don't start
unconsciously, subconsciously,
reactively picking up problems
everywhere. So before anything can be a
problem that takes up your emotional
energy, you have to accept it as a
problem. You can be choosy about your
problems. And I'm not saying I'm perfect
in that regard, but I think I'm better
than I used to be.
Well, lots of people are addicted to
solving problems. So much so that
sometimes people create problems when we
don't have any simply so that we can
solve them. We have that going on. And
then even worse is we take on problems
that we can't affect. So, uh, you know,
another one of my little quips was, uh,
you know, um, a rational person, uh,
can, uh, sort of a rational person
should should cultivate indifference to
things that are out of their control,
right? Uh, or a rational person can find
peace by cultivating indifference to
things that are out of their control.
Uh, and I'm as guilty as anybody of doom
surfing on X or social media and getting
worked up about things that I can't do
anything about, right? like, do I want
to be fighting those battles in my mind
when I literally cannot do anything
about it? So, if you find yourself
looping on a problem, like you're
watching the news too much and you're
getting caught up in a problem you can't
do anything about, um, you have to step
away from that. And, uh, modern media is
a delivery mechanism for mimetic
viruses. And now, what's happened now
is, you know, 100 years ago, 500 years
ago, if something wasn't happening in
your immediate vicinity, you wouldn't
hear about it. it wouldn't be a problem
for you. But now every single one of the
world's problems has turned into a
mimemetic virus which is going into the
battlefield of the news and is trying to
infect your mind in real time so that
yeah so that you become obsessed with
the war in Ukraine which is really far
away or you get obsessed with climate
change or you get obsessed with AI doom
or you get obsessed with whatever and
there's nothing as riveting as the old
religion the world is ending the world
is ending pay attention the world is
ending and if you don't
Cassandra complex at global scale
Cassandra complex at global scale Well,
and I would argue that large percentages
of the population are essentially just
infected with these mimetic viruses that
have taken over their brain and are
causing them to do incredible girration
about things that probably aren't even
true or are greatly exaggerated. But
even to the extent they are true,
they're things that that person can do
nothing about. And they should put their
own house in order first. So, you know,
another little line I have for myself is
your family is broken, but you're going
to fix the world. Right? People are
running out there to try and fix the
world when their own lives are a mess.
Oh my god.
Right? And and I think it defies
credibility if you can't fix your own
life first. I'm not going to take you
seriously if you can't fix your own
life. Like all these philosophers who,
you know, seem like people you emulate
and so smart or like these brilliant
celebrities and they go off and commit
suicide. Well, you just kind of
invalidated your whole way of life.
It's like that line of in No Country for
All Men where the killer is waiting for
the protagonist and protagonist shows up
and the killer says, "Well, you know, if
your set of rules brought you here, then
what good are your rules?" I didn't
work. Um I I I I am self I'm
holistically selfish in in that I want
to be objectively successful in
everything I set out to want.
Mhm. Yeah. Uh you have one life. Don't
settle for mediocrity.
Don't settle for mediocrity. And and I
think the only like people debate
intelligence for example, right? We talk
about IQ tests and all that, but I think
the only true test of intelligence is if
you get what you want out of life. And
there are two parts to that. One is
getting what you want so you know how to
get it. And the second is wanting the
right things. Knowing what to want in
the first place. I could want to be a,
you know, 6'8 basketball player and I'm
not going to get that. So it's wanting
the wrong thing. So
that's wanting something that you can't
get.
That's wanting something you can't get.
Is also wanting something that you don't
want.
Yeah. Wanting something that's a booby
prize. There are plenty of booby prizes
out there, too. Right.
I haven't heard that word in about 20
years.
Yeah. Prizes that are just not worth
having or that create their own
problems. Well, if you're not careful,
you can end up in a place in life not
only that you don't want to be, but one
that you didn't even mean to get to.
That's if you're kind of proceeding
unconsciously. Uh but and usually I
think people end up there because they
are uh going on autopilot with sort of
societal expectations or other people's
expectations. So, uh you know, or out of
guilt or out of like uh mimemetic
desire. You know, Peter Teal has this
whole thing from Rene Gerard about how
mimemetic desires are desires are picked
up from other people. Uh, and some of
those are automatically baked into
society like, you know, go to law
school, go to med school, go to
whatever, go to business school. Um, or
they might be from watching what your
friends are doing and, you know, the
other monkeys are doing. Um, or it might
just be, you know, what your parents
expectations are. I might be a guilt.
You know, guilt is just society's voice
speaking in your head, socially
programmed, so you'll be a good little
monkey and do things that are good for
the tribe.
Um, but I think the the the best
outcomes come when you think it through
for yourself and decide for yourself.
And I don't think people spend enough
time deciding. For example, we run on
these uh four-year cycles. You know, in
Silicon Valley, you go join a startup,
you vest your stock over four years.
That's the standard. Okay? Um uh in u uh
college, you know, you go for four
years. High school, you go for four
years. Um some things take longer. You
know, you have children, they hit
puberty 9 years later. That's like a
9-year cycle until that relationship
changes. Um but we're used to these
fairly long cycles, multi-year cycles in
which we are committed to things. You go
to law school, you know, four or five
year cycle. You go be a lawyer, 40-year
cycle. These are very long cycles. The
amount of time we spend deciding what to
do and who to do it with, very short,
very very short, right? We spend, you
know, 3 months deciding, one month
deciding on a job where we're going to
be for 10 years or 5 years. And because
a lot of discovery is path dependent
where the next thing you find on the
path is depend on where you were on the
previous path. You sort of start going
down this vector that is a very long
distance. People decide frivolously
which city to live in and that's going
to decide who their friends are, what
their jobs are, their opportunity, their
weather, their food supply, their air
supply, quality of life. You know, it's
such an important decision, but people
spend so little time thinking it
through. I would argue that if you're
making a four-year decision, spend a
year thinking it through. Like really
thinking it through.
25% of the time.
Yeah. Exactly. There's the secretary
theorem. I don't know if you know that
one.
Computer science.
After you've done this many people, pick
the best one of the next however many.
That's right.
Yeah. The secretary theorem is this
computer science professor is trying to
figure out uh how much time he should
spend interviewing secretaries and then
how long to keep the secretary. So let's
say he's going to have a secretary for
10 years. Does he keep searching for you
know one year, 2 years, 3 years, 1
month, 2 months? What is the optimal
time? Uh and it turns out that the
optimal time is somewhere around a
third. about a third of the way through,
you take the best person you've worked
with and try to find someone that good
or better. So that by the time you've
gotten about a third of the way through,
you have, excuse me, seen enough that
you now have a sense of what the bar is.
And then anybody who meets or exceeds
that bar is good enough.
And this applies to dating, this applies
to jobs and careers, this applies
generally. But the interesting thing
about the secretary theorem is that it's
actually not time based. It's not based
on onethird of the time. It's iteration
based.
The number of candidates,
the number of shots you took on goal.
That's right. So, you want to have lots
and lots of iterations. So, that means
that you need to bail out quickly and
you need to be decisive quickly.
You need to you need to take
opportunities quickly and bail out
quickly.
Correct. Like if you go back and you
look through failed relationships, uh
probably the biggest regret will be
staying in the relationship after you
knew it was over.
Exactly. You should have left sooner.
The moment you knew it wasn't going to
work out, you should have moved on. So
in that sense, I think Malcolm Gladwell
popularized this idea of 10,000 hours to
mastery. I would say it's actually
10,000 iterations to mastery. It's not
actually 10,000. It's some unknown
number. But it's about the number of
iterations that drives a learning curve.
And iteration is not repetition.
Repetition is a different thing.
Repeating is doing the same thing over
and over. Iteration is modifying it with
a learning and then doing another
version of it. So that's error
correction. So if you get 10,000 error
corrections in anything, you will be an
expert at it. don't partner with cynics
and pessimists. You mentioned there
about uh the people who've got a
nightmare going on at home and are
trying to fix the world. But a lot of
the time that cynicism and pessimism we
find in ourselves. We see the world
whether we want to whether it's because
we've embied what the news or or the
negative people around us have said or
it's a bit more kind of endogenous than
that. It's just sort of in us. It's the
way that we see the world. How can
people
avoid cynicism and pessimism within
themselves?
Yeah. Synism and pessimism is a tough
one. It's we're naturally hardwired for
it. Again, I go back to evolution. I I'm
sorry to keep harping on evolution, but
within biology, there's very few good
explanatory theories. And you know,
theory of evolution by natural selection
is probably the best one. So, if you
can't explain something about life or
psychology or human nature through
evolution, then you probably don't have
a good theory for it. And I would say
that pessimism is another one that comes
out of this, which is in the natural
environment, you're hardwired to be
pessimistic. Because let's say that I
see something rustling in the woods and
if I move towards it and it turns out to
be food and prey then good I get to eat
one meal but if it turns out to be a
predator I get eaten and that's the end
of that. So we are hardwired to avoid
ruin um and and uh you know just dying.
So we are naturally hardwired to be
pessimists but modern society is very
different despite whatever problems you
may have with modern society. It is far
far safer than living in the jungle and
just trying to survive. uh and the
opportunities on the upside are
nonlinear. For example, when you're
investing, if you short a stock, you the
most money you can make is 2x. You just
lose, you know, if the stock goes to
zero, you double your money. But if the
stock is the next Nvidia and it goes
100x or a,000x, you make a lot of money.
So upside through because of leverage is
nearly unlimited.
Uh also in modern society, because
there's so many different people you can
interact with, if you go on a date and
it fails, there are infinite more people
to go on a date with. In a tribal
system, there might have been 20 people
and you can't even get through all of
them. So, modern society is far more
forgiving of failure. And you just have
to sort of neoccortically realize and
override that. You have to realize that
you're much more running a search
function to find the thing that'll work.
And then that one thing will pay off in
massive compounding. Once you find your
mate for the rest of your life, you find
your wife or your husband, then you can
compound in that relationship. It's okay
if you had 50 failed dates in between.
The same way once you find the one
business you're meant to plow into and
it'll compound returns. It's okay if you
had 50 small failed ventures or 50 small
failed job interviews. It doesn't the
number of failures doesn't matter. And
so there's no point in being a
pessimist. It's you want to be an
optimist. But I would say you want to be
you want to be skeptical about specific
things. Every specific opportunity is
probably a fail. But you want to be
optimistic in the general. In the
general you want to be like something in
here is going to work out.
How do you navigate that tension?
I mean, exactly as I said, I'm
optimistic in the general that if
something fails right now, then this is
a little woowoo, but it wasn't meant to
be. It was a learning experience. It was
an iteration. As long as I learned
something from it, then it's a win. If I
didn't learn from it, then it's a loss.
But as long as you're learning and you
keep iterating fast and cutting your
losses quickly, then when you find the
right thing, you have to be optimistic
and compound into it. So, you don't want
to jump into the first thing. And you
don't want to marry the first person you
date necessarily, unless you got very
lucky.
Um, but you you want to investigate and
explore very very quickly until you find
the match. And then you have to be
willing to go all in. You have to be
willing to move your chips to the center
of the table. So both those uh both
those uh approaches are required.
So it's a barbell strategy. It's sort of
black or it's white. And most people are
sort of stuck in this gray bit. And I'm
like half in, but I'm kind of don't
really know if I am. I also think like
labels like pessimist, optimist, cynic,
introvert, extrovert, these are very
self-limiting. Humans are very dynamic.
There are times when you feel like being
introverted. There are times when you
feel like being extroverted. There are
contexts in which you'll be pessimistic.
There are contexts in which you'll be
optimistic.
Leave all those labels alone. It's
better just to look at the problem at
hand. Look at reality the way it is. Try
to take yourself out of the equation in
a in a sense. Like obviously you're
involved, but motivated reasoning is the
worst kind of reasoning. Uh you're not
going to find truth through highly
motivated reasoning. You have to be
objective. And objective means trying to
take yourself out of it as much as
possible or at least your personality
out of it as much as possible.
And so to the extent you run with this
thick identity and personality, it's
going to cloud your judgment. It's going
to try and lock you into the past. If
you say, "I'm a depressed, unhappy
person. Yeah, I'm going to be unhappy."
That's a way of locking yourself into
your past. even saying, "I have trauma.
I have PTSD." Yeah, you you feel
something. There are memories. There are
flashes. There are occasional bad
feelings. But don't define yourself by
it because then you'll lock it into your
identity and you're just going to loop
on it. It's better to stay flexible
because reality is always changing and
you have to be able to adapt to it.
Adaptation is also intelligence.
Adaptation is survival. Adaptation is
kind of how you're here. You're here
because you're an adapter and your
ancestors were adapters. So to adapt,
you will be able to see things clearly.
And if you're seeing them through your
own identity, it's going to cloud your
judgment. A quick aside, you've probably
heard me talk about element before. In
fact, you might be thinking, "For sake,
Chris, will you shut up about element?"
And the answer is no, I won't because
when I take it, I genuinely feel the
difference. I genuinely believe that
proper hydration makes a massive
difference to your performance. So, I'm
going to keep talking about it until you
start drinking it. Element is a tasty
electrolyte drink mix with everything
that you need and nothing that you
don't. Each grab-and-go stick pack
contains a sciencebacked electrolyte
ratio of sodium, potassium, and
magnesium with no sugar, no coloring, no
artificial ingredients, or any other
junk. It plays a critical role in
reducing muscle cramps and fatigue while
optimizing brain health, regulating
appetite, and curbing cravings. This
orange flavor in a cold glass of water
is how I've started my morning every
single day for over 3 years now, and I
genuinely feel the difference versus
when I don't. Best of all, they have a
no questions asked refund policy with an
unlimited duration. So, you can buy it
and try it for as long as you want. And
if you don't like it for any reason,
they'll just give you your money back.
You don't even need to return the box.
That's how confident they are that you
love it. Plus, they offer free shipping
within the US. And right now, you can
get a free sample pack of all eight
flavors with your first box by going to
the link in the description below or
heading to drinklnt.com/modernwisdom.
That's drinklnt.com/modern
wisdom.
[Laughter]
Moving on to sort of thinking about
happiness. Obviously a topic of yours
that's a
it's honestly the one that I feel least
qualified to talk about.
Is it like a guy that's got long arms
teaching you how to bench press or a
dude that's really tall teaching you how
to deadlift? someone that feels like
they came from behind the eightball.
Yeah. Is you're you're asking a crazy
person about their thoughts. So, just
thought it through. Is happiness still
more about peace than it is about joy?
It's just one of those overloaded words
that means different things to different
people. So, I'm not even sure we're
communicating the same language. But, uh
what is happiness?
I think it's just basically being okay
with where you are.
Not wanting
not wanting things to be different than
the way they are. Not having the sense
that anything is missing in this moment.
Needing something to change. Your
current positive situation being
contingent on an adjustment
on getting something from the outside
world.
Ironically,
I think most people if you were to ask
them when they were happiest for a
sustained period of time, not for a
brief moment, because pleasure can
override happiness and create kind of
this illusion of happiness.
But if you ask people when they were
happy for a sustained period of time,
they were probably doing some variation
of nothing.
That's interesting because in the chase
is this sort of lack, this contingency.
That's right. But then you get bored. If
you just sit around all the time, you
get bored. So you want adventure, you
want surprise. Like there's a funny
thought experiment of the bliss machine,
right? Which is suppose I could drill a
hole in your head and put electrode in.
And they did this with monkeys and I can
put a wire in there and I can stimulate
just the right part of your brain and I
can put you in bliss and you'll just be
in bliss. Would you would you want that?
Would that be nice?
For how long?
Do it and I'll tell you.
Right. So most people will say, "Well, I
don't want that. I want meaning. I don't
want just bliss. I want meaning." And
you're like, "Okay, well, I'll put an
electrode in there and I'll give you
meaning. How about that?" And if you
kind of run this thought experiment long
enough, I think most people realize
actually what I want is I want surprise.
I want and
I want the world to surprise me and I
want to wrestle with it in ways that are
somewhat predictable but somewhat not.
And you kind of end up back where you
started.
So I I don't know if necessarily
for some people Pure happiness is the
ultimate goal. They want to, you know,
just be blissfully happy wherever they
are, whenever they are. But I think
other people, most people would say,
well, I'm here in this world. I'm here
in this life. I don't understand it or
why, but I want to be I want to be
engaged. I want to be surprised. I want
to do things. I want to accomplish
things. I want to want things and then
get them. Right? That's kind of the
whole game that we're all playing here.
Surprises are really interesting. the
sort of unpredictability. I think total
bro science here, but I'm pretty sure
that that's kind of how dopamine works.
That things are a bit better than you
expected. That within that it means that
if you for the perennial insecure
overachievers that uh cloy for control
that really want to be able to the
schedule is perfectly done and we know
the itinerary, we know where we're going
to be at this time. you're in some ways
I guess reducing down the capacity for
surprise because everything has become
uh very contrived prescribed done in
advance laid out your ability to be
surprised actually diminishes. Yeah. If
if nothing worked out the way you
expected, if it was all serendipity and
you didn't want that, you would just be
a ball of anxiety. On the other hand, if
everything worked out as you expected
and wanted, you'd be so bored you might
as well be dead. So there's some, you
know, the the river of life kind of
flows between these two banks and enjoy
it.
You say thinking about yourself is the
source of all unhappiness, but
presumably you need to work on yourself
and your weaknesses as well. So some
degree of reflection is important. And
if thinking about yourself is a source
of unhappiness, is this a price that you
need to pay? I need to sort of reflect
inward. I'm going to have to diminish
this level of happiness for a little
while and then I can use this new level.
I've got my brown belt on and I can go
out into the world as a brown belt.
What I'm specifically referring to that
is if if you're thinking about your
personality and your ego and the
character of you and uh you're obsessing
over that. That's where a lot of
depression and unhappiness sort of
lingers and and gets cultivated.
Uh so uh thinking about woe is me, this
happened to me. that happened to me. I
have this personality. I have this
issue. I deserve this. I didn't get
that. That's you're just strengthening a
little beast in there that is
insatiable. And that's where I think a
lot of unhappiness comes from.
What's the beast?
It's the ego. But that word is so
overused that I kind of hate to use the
word. Um, but it's like a it's a
recurrent collection of thoughts that
are very self-obsessed and will never be
satisfied.
Very concretized as well. So, they're
not malleable, not particularly
flexible. So you're just adding to them
by thinking about them all the time.
You're creating narratives and stories
and identities. Um but that's different
from solving personal problems. So if
you encounter something, you learn from
something, you're reflecting upon the
learning, then you can reflect upon it,
absorb it, and then just move on. But
sitting there saying, "I'm Chris. I'm
Nal. I deserve this. This happened to
me. That person wronged me. This is who
I am. This shouldn't have happened. I
need to go get revenge on this or I need
to fix that or change this." I mean that
I think is where a lot of mental illness
is, you know, comes from.
So it depends if you are thinking about
something to solve a problem and get it
off your chest and get it off your mind.
If it leaves your mind clearer at the
end of it, then I think it was
worthwhile. If it leaves your mind
busier at the end of it, then you're
probably going the wrong direction.
Is this a a justification for
detachment? uh cultivated ignorance uh
distraction.
Detachment is not a goal. Detachment is
a byproduct. It's it's just a byproduct
of just realizing you know what matters
and what doesn't. Uh and and just for
one moment on the self thing, I think
everybody craves thinking about
something more than themselves. If you
want to be, you know, happy to some
extent, you have to forget about your
personal problems. And one way to do
that is take on other problems, bigger
problems. Uh and that could be a
mission, that could be s that could be
spirituality, that could be kids, um it
could be caring about the planet,
although I think people take that a
little far, you know, and then they get
kind of oppressive and and tyrannical in
support of abstract concepts. But so
these can be taken too far. Just like
religion for example, just like
anything in excess,
anything in excess, right? Um but
generally the less you think about
yourself, the more you can think about a
mission or about God or about a child or
something like that. I remember Vinnie
Himmath uh the founder of Loom said uh I
am rich and I have no idea to do what to
do with my life and you replied God kids
on mission pick at least one that's
right preferably all three.
It's very liberating.
Um yeah thinking I think overthinking
about yourself is probably the it's it
may not be the cause of depression but
it certainly doesn't help rumination.
Yeah. I
I kind of had a self-induced Stockholm
syndrome from this sort of a thing
because I like to think about stuff and
you provide you with an endless number
of things to think about. So, you're
kind of Yeah, you have this um you're
the prisoner and the prison guard at the
same time. And I had Abigail Shrier on
the show. She was wrote this book called
Bad Therapy, sort of pushing back
against therapy culture for kids,
specifically for kids. there was a blast
radius that covered pretty much
everything, including kind of CBT, I'm
like, f like we're getting perilously
close to some really evidence-based
stuff here. But
the more that I've thought about it and
the more that I've looked at the
evidence, there is like basically a
direct correlation between how much you
think about yourself and how miserable
you are. Therapy is great if it lets you
vent and it solves a thing and then x
session later you're done. You're clear.
But if you're just looping on the same
thing forever, then it's actually the
opposite.
You're bathing in it. You're indulging
in it. Yeah. Yeah.
How have your become happy techniques
developed over time?
Yeah, I used to have a lot of them. Uh,
now I kind of try not to have any
because I think the techniques
themselves are kind of a struggle. It's
sort of like bidding for status implies
you're low status. It reveals that
you're low status. So, someone who's
basically trying to show off uh comes
across as low status. The same way
someone who's trying to be happy is sort
of saying I'm unhappy and creating that
frame. So it's better just to not even
think in terms of
you position yourself as being in lack
in order to attain.
Yeah. I don't even think in terms of
happiness unhappiness anymore. I just
kind of just do my thing.
Again, another question that's similar
to a bunch of them. Do you think you
could have got there had you have not
done the procedural systematic sort of
step by step by step this is what it is
and then come out the other side?
I don't think there are any formulas. I
think it's unique to each person. It's
like asking a successful person, how did
you become successful? Each one of them
will give you a different story. Uh you
can't follow anyone else's path. And
most of them are even probably telling
you some narratized version of it that
isn't quite true.
I mean, that's something that I
continually realize, especially as I get
to spend more time around people that
are successful and you hear um it's very
important to prioritize work life
balance, right? That's one of the most
common things that people who have
attained success say
that's not my experience. But if you
look at, you shouldn't be asking
somebody who is successful what they do
to continue their success now. You
should be asking them what did they do
to attain their success when they are
where you were.
And the people who are really
extraordinarily successful didn't sit
around watching success porn.
They just went and did it. They just had
they had such an overwhelming desire to
be successful at the thing that they
were doing that they just went and did
that thing. They didn't have time to
study and learn and listen and they just
did it. It's the overwhelming desire
that's the most important and the focus
that comes from that.
That tweet of yours that was uh people
who are good at making wealth or people
are good at attaining wealth don't need
to teach anybody else how to do it.
Yeah. You don't need mentors, you need
action. That was one of them. Another
one is you know the uh the people who
actually know how to make money don't
need to sell you a course on it. There
it is.
Um, yeah, there's lots of variations on
it. But I if you don't, another one is
if you don't lie awake at night thinking
about it, you don't want it badly
enough.
Yeah, I think you I've heard you talk
before about how um sort of unclosed
loops problems that you're working on
can cause you to be sleepless. And uh
this
I'm not a good sleeper.
Tell me about that.
Oh, I mean my eight sleep hates me. It's
always telling me I failed at sleeping
again. And Brian Johnson thinks I'm
going to die early. He's probably right.
But I
How much do you reckon you sleep a
night? You got any idea?
Oh, it's so random. Some nights I'll
sleep 8 hours. Some nights I'll sleep 4
hours. But it's literally just random.
Are you bothered about that? You trying
to optimize? You go a sleep coach
teaching you how to
I don't fogg myself over things. Uh if I
want to sleep, I'll sleep. If I don't
want to sleep, I don't sleep. It's not a
I don't think I'm doing anything right
or wrong.
You don't label it good night, bad
night.
No, I work out every day because I think
it gives me more energy and I've gotten
into a good habit with it. Maybe I'll do
the same thing with sleep. Maybe I'll
develop a good habit, but I'm not going
to beat myself up over it. There'll come
a point where it's important to me and
when it's important to me, I'll just do
it. You know, most of like, for example,
you look at people with addictions,
right? Overeating or smoking or
whatever, they can
kind of go through all the different
methods, but it's half-hearted. And then
one day they're like, "Oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I've got
lung cancer. My dad has lung cancer."
and they drop it immediately.
So I think a lot a lot of change is more
about desire and understanding than it
is about uh forcing yourself or trying
to domesticate yourself.
It's efficiency again I guess you know
aligning the thing that you want to do
with the way that you feel about what it
is that you want to do.
Yeah. It's not it's not getting caught
up in a in a half desire or a mimetic
desire. It's really just
being aware of what it is that you
actually want at this point in time. And
when you want something, then you will
act on it with maximal capability.
And that's the time to act on it. In the
meantime, just doing it because other
people tell you you should do it or
society tells you you should do it or
you feel slightly guilty about it. These
are these are half-hearted efforts and
half-hearted efforts don't get you
there. As you get older, one thing that
becomes harder to ignore is your
testosterone levels. They impact
everything from
your energy to your mood and how well
you recover. However, there are
sciencebacked supplements like Tonat
that support testosterone strength and
recovery. And that is why I'm such a
huge fan of Momentus' product because
they make the only NSFcertified Tonat
Ali on the planet. That means it's so
rigorously tested that even Olympic
athletes can use it and why I partnered
with them because they make the most
carefully tested, highest quality
supplements on Earth. This is a huge
part of my brain, body, and sleep stack,
which makes a big impact on my
cognition, my strength, and my recovery.
And if you're still unsure, Momentous
offers a 30-day money back guarantee.
So, you can buy it and try it for 29
days. If you don't love it, they'll give
you your money back. Plus, they ship
internationally. Right now, you can get
35% off your subscription and that
30-day money back guarantee by going to
heading to livemus.com/modernwisdomd
and using the code modernwisdom at
checkout. That's l i v m o m e n t
o.com/modernwisdom
and modern wisdom a checkout. You
mentioned anxiety before. Uh imagine how
effective you'd be if you weren't
anxious all the time is is one of yours
and anxiety is the emotion dour of the
21st century and lots of driven people
very anxious very paranoid that's what's
caused them to be affected. They pay so
much attention detail oriented not
letting things go staying up at night
thinking about it. That's the paranoia
coming in. What have you come to learn
about anxiety and dealing with it?
So, anxiety and stress are interesting.
They're very related. Stress is when uh
like if you look at an iron beam, when
an iron beam is under stress, it's cuz
it's being bent in two different
directions at the same time. So, when
your mind is under stress, it's because
it has two conflicting desires at once.
So, for example, you know, you you want
to be liked, but you want to do
something selfish, and you can't
reconcile the two, and so you're under
stress. uh you want to do something for
somebody else, you want to do something
for yourself, right? These aream you you
don't want to go to work but you want to
make money so you're under stress right
so you have two conflicting desires and
I think one of the ways to get through
stress is to acknowledge that oh I
actually have two conflicting desires
and either I need to resolve it I need
to pick one and then be okay losing the
other or I will decide later but at
least just being aware of why you're
stress can help alleviate a lot of
stress and then anxiety I think is sort
of this pervasive unidentifiable able
stress where you're just kind of
stressed out all the time and you're not
even sure why and you can't even
identify the underlying problem. I think
the reason for that is because you you
have so many uh unresolved problems,
unresolved stress points that have piled
up in your life that you can no longer
identify what the problems are and
there's this mountain of garbage in your
mind and it's a little bit of it poking
out the top like an iceberg and that's
anxiety. But underneath there's a lot of
unresolved things. And so you just need
to kind of go through very carefully
every time you're anxious. Like, okay,
why am I anxious this time? I don't know
why. Oh, well, let me sit here and just
think about it. Let me let me write down
what the possible causes could be. Let
me meditate on it. Let me journal. Let
me talk to a therapist. Let me talk to
my friends. Let me just kind of see like
when does that stress go away? If you
can kind of identify and unravel and
resolve these issues, then I think that
helps get rid of anxiety. uh a lot of
the anxiety is piled up because we move
through life too quickly, not observing
our own reactions to things. We don't
resolve them. So, this goes counter to
what I was saying earlier about not
reflecting too much on things, but you
reflect on the problems to observe them
and solve them. You don't reflect on
them to feel better about yourself,
to indulge them.
Well, if if if you're doing it to just
feel better about yourself, that could
be strengthening your personality and
your ego and could be creating a more
fragile personality. Um, you know, one
one big anxiety resolver for me is just
ruminating on death. I think that's a
good one. You're going to die. It's all
going to zero. You cannot take anything
with you. And I know this is trit. And I
know the the we don't spend enough time
thinking about the big questions. We
kind of give up on them when we're very,
very young. You know, a little child
might ask the big questions like, why
are we here? What's the meaning of life?
What is this all about? You know, is
there Santa Claus? Is there God? But
then as adults, we're taught not to
think about these things or we've given
up on them. But I think the big
questions are the big questions for good
reasons. And uh if you can keep the idea
in front of you at all times that you're
going to die and that everything goes
literally to zero.
What's there to stress about?
Yeah. For better or worse, life is very
short. How should people deal with its
briefness?
Enjoy it.
Make the best of it. You know, it's it's
even briefer than that. Each moment just
disappears. it's gone. There's only a
present moment and it's gone instantly.
So if you're not if you're not there for
it, if you're stressed out or you're
anxious or you're thinking about
something else, you missed it. So you're
any moment when you're not in that
moment, you are dead to that moment.
You might as well be dead because your
mind is off doing something else or you
know living in some imagined reality
that is just a very poor substitute for
the actual reality. So one of my recent
realizations was what is wasted time?
What is a what is a waste of time? So I
don't like to waste time but what is
wasted time? And everything is wasted
time in a sense because nothing matters
in the ultimate.
Uh but in each moment the thing matters.
In each moment it's the only thing that
matters. Actually the what's happening
in front of you is literally has all the
meaning in the world. And so what
matters is just being present for the
thing. So if you're doing something that
you want to do and you're fully there
for it, then it's not wasted time. If
you don't want to do it and your mind is
running away from it and you're reacting
against it and you're wishing you were
somewhere else and you're thinking about
some other thing or you're anticipating
some future thing or regretting some
past thing or being fearful of
something, then that's wasted time.
That's time that's being wasted when
you're not actually present for the
reality in front of you. So my
definition of wasted time, yes I do want
some material things in life and I you
know there there are things that have
more value than others within this life
but this life is very short and bounded.
So the true wasted time is a time that
you're not present for when you are not
there for it. When you're not doing the
thing you want to do to the best of your
capability such that you're immersed in
it. If you're not immersed in this
moment then you're wasting your time.
People get worried about dying and no
longer being here, but they don't
realize that so much of their life is
spent not being here in any case.
That's right. But and I think people
crave being here for it. And and and
when you're here for it, you're actually
not thinking about yourself. You are
more immersed in the thing, the the
moment, the task at hand.
We don't want peace of mind. We want
peace for our mind.
That's right. Yeah. You don't peace. The
mind is what can eat you alive if you
let it. And there's more to you than the
mind.
Well, I mean the very
I don't want to disassemble the body, so
to speak, right? Because please go on.
Yeah. At the end of the day, like
everything arises within your
consciousness, right? You you
got nowhere else to experience it.
Sorry.
You've got nowhere else to experience.
Nowhere else to experience it. And that
consciousness is uh relatively static in
the sense that it's been exactly the
same from the moment you were born to
the moment you die. And everything that
you experience from your body from your
mind to the world to to everything is
within that consciousness. Uh and that
thing that base layer of being and this
is what the Buddhists will tell you is
the real thing. Everything that comes
and goes in the middle including your
mind including your body is unreal. And
trying to find stability in those
transient things is is your castle that
you're building on sand that's going to
crumble.
Life is going to play out the way it's
going to play out. There will be some
good and some bad. Most of it is
actually just up to your interpretation.
You're born, you have a set of sensory
experiences, and then you die. How you
choose to interpret those experiences is
up to you. And different people
interpret them in different ways. Yeah.
The old line about two people walking
down the street. They're having the
exact same experience. One is h
experience. One is happy, one is sad,
right? It's a narrative in their heads.
It's how they choose to interpret. Um,
so I think when I said that, it was a
long time ago. I was talking more about
having positive interpretations and
negative interpretations. But these
days, I think it's better just not to
have any interpretations and to just
allow things to be.
You're still going to have
interpretations.
You can't stop it. Uh and nor should you
try. But even that having an
interpretation is just a thing you can
leave alone.
Yeah. I really want to try and just dig
in a little more to the best way to
remind people that they should value
their time. just how brief it is that
the time that you spend ruminating,
being distracted, fears of the past,
regrets.
Well,
I don't want to tell anybody how to live
their life. I would just say that to the
extent that you want to improve your
quality of life, the uh the easiest and
best way to do that is to observe your
own mind and your own thoughts and and
be a little not not necessarily critical
but um be observant of yourself more
objectively and then you'll kind of
realize your own loops and patterns. It
takes time. It's not it's not overnight.
It's not instantaneous.
So you mean letting go is not a one-time
event.
Yeah. And and there's letting go is not
necessarily even the right answer. Like
yes, if you're trying to be an
enlightened being and you know you want
to live like a god and everything's
going to be perfect and be a Buddha,
sure you can let go. But uh I think in
practice it's actually quite hard to do.
Um,
I think I would say that it's uh you're
going to find a lot of fulfillment out
of life by just doing what you want to
do and genuinely exploring what it is
that you want rather than doing what
other people expect you to do or society
expects you to do or what you might just
think should be done by default. Um, you
know, I think most older successful
people will tell you that their life was
best when they lived it unapologetically
on their own terms.
Be selfish.
Holistic selfishness. We can clip that
little selfish. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Keep
running back.
Bad guy. Great.
I I had this insight or a question, I
guess. How much do you think that we
should trust the voice in our heads?
Because half of wisdom suggests to rely
on your sort of bottomup intuition and
then half of it has to be sort of top
down rational as possible. How do you
navigate the tension between head and
gut in this way?
I think the gut is what decides. Um the
head is kind of what rationalizes it
afterwards. The gut is the ultimate
decision maker. If it doesn't and and
what is the gut? The gut is refined
judgment. It's taste aggregate
aggregated and it could be aggregated
through evolution uh and it's in your
genes and your DNA or it could be
aggregated through your experiences and
what you've thought through. The mind is
good at solving new problems and uh new
problems in the external world that have
defi defined edges you know beginnings
and ends and and objectives.
What the mind is actually really bad at
is making hard decisions. So when you
have a hard decision to make I find it's
better to yes you ruminate on it. You
think through all the pros and cons but
then you sleep on it. You wait a couple
of days. You wait until the gut answer
appears with conviction and it feels
right. And when you're younger, it takes
longer because you just don't have as
much experience. And when you're older,
uh, it can happen much faster, which is
why, you know,
and you have less time to
Yeah. And old people just more set in
their ways as a consequence, right? They
know what they want. They know what they
don't want. Um, so it takes time to
develop your gut instinct and judgment.
But once you've developed them, don't
trust anything else because you can't go
against your gut. It'll bite you in the
end. Uh usually in relationships that
failed, you can look back and say, "Oh,
actually, I knew it was going to fail
because of this reason, but I kind of
went ahead anyway because I wanted it to
be this way, right? I wanted this person
to be a different way than they are, or
I wanted to get a different thing out of
it than I thought I was going to than I
knew I was going to get, but I just
wanted it." So sometimes desire will
override your judgment and then trap.
Yeah. Wishful thinking. It traps you
into a into a pathway that chews up
time.
What's that uh inside of yours? U we
think we can't change ourselves but we
can. We think we can change other people
but we can't.
Exactly. Uh I think to add to that you
can't change other people. You can
change your reaction to them. You can
change yourself but other people only
change through trauma or their own
insight on their own schedule and never
in a way that you like.
Yeah. Alanderon says that uh people do
sometimes change but rarely in
relationships and never when they're
told to.
Absolutely. Yeah. The fastest way to
kind of alienate somebody is to tell
them to change. In fact, uh the Dale
Carnegie School of Public Speaking, you
know, the way that operates is, uh they
get you up there and they realize that
the number one problem with public
speaking is uh that uh people are very
self-conscious and so uh people who are
practicing in the Dale Carnegie School
of Public Speaking, I don't know, I
never went through I heard this
secondhand so I could be wrong but I
like the story where they get up and
they start speaking and the people in
the audience are only allowed to
compliment them genuine compliments not
fake compliments on things that they did
well but you're not allowed to criticize
them on things that they did poorly and
eventually they kind of get through it
and they develop the self-confidence
the same way uh there's like the
Michelle Thomas school of language
learning and on that one what they do is
you listen to a teacher talking to a
student they're not teaching you you're
not expected to remember or memorize
anything you just listen to a student
stumbling over the language. It's a
better way to learn because you yourself
don't feel flustered. You're being
tested, graded.
Oh, so you're not in your own head as
much.
Correct. You're not in your own head and
you're just you might even be laughing
at the student or you might be agreeing
with the teacher or vice versa or
sympathizing with the student. But
because you are a passive observer, you
can be more objective about it and you
aren't threatened or fearful and you can
learn better. And coming back to the
original point of you can't change
people. If you do want to change
someone's behavior, I I think the only
effective way to do it is to compliment
them when they do something you want.
Not to positive.
Yeah. Exactly. Not to insult them or be
negative or critical when they do
something you don't want. And we can't
help it. It's obviously in our nature to
criticize. And I do it as well, but it
just reminds me that like when somebody
does something praiseworthy, don't
forget to praise them. Like definitely
go out of your way and and it'll be
genuine. It has to be genuine. It can't
be a fake thing. uh this is not, you
know, one of those uh just dropping
compliments type thing eventually that
people will see through that. They want
authenticity, but just don't forget to
praise people when they do something
praiseworthy and you'll get more of that
behavior. There was a a really famous
thread on Reddit about five questions to
ask yourself if you're uncertain about
your relationship. One of the questions
was, "Are you truly in love with your
partner or just their potential or the
idea of them?" And that's the, you know,
they show such great promise. They they
look at their look at their ability for
for for change and growth. They they
they they're on the right path.
The partner matching thing is so hard.
Uh you know, when people come and ask me
like, "Oh, should I be with this
person?" Like, "Well, if you're asking
me, the answer is clearly no." Right?
Because you wouldn't have to ask if you
were with the right person or when you
ask someone like why they're uh in a
relationship with somebody and they
start reading out his or her resume,
right? That's also a bad sign.
What do you mean? Oh, it's like, oh, we
have so much in common. We like to golf
together. It's like, it's not a basis
for a relationship. Or, oh, you know,
she's a ballerina or, you know, he went
to Harvard or what have you. These are
resume items. That's not who the person
actually is.
What's a better answer?
I just love being with this person. I
just trust them. I, you know, I I enjoy
being around them. I I I love how
capable he is. I love how kind kind she
is. You know, I love her spirit. I love
his energy.
uh the more the the more materially and
concretely definable the reasons are
you're together the worse they are.
Uh the ineffable is actually where the
sort of true love lies
because real love is a form of unity.
It's a form of connection. It's
connecting spirits. Oh you two, my
consciousness meets your consciousness.
It's a the the the underlying drive uh
in love, in art, in uh science, in uh
mysticism is the desire for unity. It's
a desire for connection. As you know,
Bourhees famously wrote, "In every
human, there's a sense that something
infinite has been lost." You know,
there's a God-shaped hole in you you're
trying to fill.
And so, we're always trying to find that
connection. Love is trying to find it in
one other person and saying, "Okay,
you're male, I'm female, or whatever."
And you know, whatever your
predilictions are, and now now we
connect, now we form a hole uh connected
hole. Or in mysticism it's like it's all
about okay sit down meditate and you'll
feel the whole. In science it's like oh
uh you know atoms bouncing is mechanics
but that generates heat. So
thermodynamics and motion or kinetics
are one combined theory that's a whole.
Electricity and magnetism are one thing
that's that's the whole creates that
sense of awe. Uh in art it's like I feel
an emotion I create a piece of art
around it and then you see that painting
or you see the cysteine chapel or you
read the poem and you feel that emotion.
So again, it's it's creating unity. It's
creating connection. Uh and I think
everybody craves that. And so when you
really love somebody, it's because you
you feel a sense of wholeness by being
around them. Uh and that sense of
wholeness probably doesn't have anything
to do with what school they went to, you
know, or what career they're in. Just
sort of tying that into the life is
short, stop [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about. Uh if you're
faced with a difficult choice and you
cannot decide, the answer is no. And the
reason is modern society is full of
options.
Yeah.
Knowing this rationally sounds sounds
great, but having the courage to commit
to it in reality, I think is a different
task. And cutting your losses quickly in
the big three, relationships, jobs, and
locations is hard. What would you say to
someone who may cerebrally be able to
agree with you and say, "I understand."
My cousin said this about me. He said
that uh he said what I really he says
what I've really noticed about you is
your ability to walk away from
situations that are just not great
enough for you or not good enough for
you. And I think that is a
characteristic that I have. I will not
accept second best outcomes in my life.
ultimately you will end up wherever is
acceptable to you. You will get out of
life whatever is acceptable to you. Um,
and there are certain things to me that
are very very important where I will not
settle for second best. But then there
are a lot of other things I just don't
care about because if I spend all my
time caring about those things, I don't
have the energy for the few things that
matter. And uh, so in decision-m I have
a few heristics for myself. Other people
can use their own, but mine are if you
can't decide, the answer is no. If
you're offered an opportunity, if you
have a new thing that you're saying yes
or no to that is a change from where
you're starting, the answer is by
default always no. Secondly, uh if you
have two decisions, if you have A or B
and both seem like very equal, take the
path that's more painful in the short
term, the one that's going to be painful
immediately because your brain is always
trying to avoid pain. So any pain that
is imminent, it is going to treat as
much larger than it actually is.
This is kind of like a decision-making
equivalent of Talib surgeon.
Uh tell surgeon where you want the
surgeon that doesn't look as good
because he's more likely to be a good
surgeon. Yeah, it's similar in that
appearances are deceiving because you're
avoiding conflict. You're avoiding pain.
So take the path is more painful in the
short term because your brain is
creating this illusion that the
short-term pain is greater than the
long-term pain. Because long-term yeah
you you'll commit your future self to
all kinds of long-term mana.
Mñana
exactly mñana. So take the more
short-term painful one. And then finally
the last one which I would credit Kapo
Gupta with uh is that you want to take
it take the choice that will leave you
more equinimous in the long term. By
quantumous he means like more at peace
more mental peace in the long term. So
whatever clears your mind more and will
have you having less self-t talk in the
future if you can model that out that is
probably the better route to go. And
then I would focus decision-m down on
the three things that really matter
because everything else is downstream of
these these three decisions. Especially
these are early life decisions. Later in
life, you have different things to
optimize for. But early in life, you're
trying to figure out who you're with,
what you're doing, and where you live.
And I think on all three of those, you
want to think you want to think pretty
hard about it. And people do some of
these unconsciously. You know, who
you're with very often it's like, well,
we were in a relationship. We stumbled
along. It felt okay. It had been enough
time, so we got married. Right? Not
great reasons. Maybe not terrible
reasons either. I mean, people who
overthink these things sometimes don't
get the right answer. But maybe here, if
you're the kind of person that's not
going to settle for second best, you
iterate. You iterate on a closed time
frame so you don't run out the clock.
And then you decide um on what you do.
You try a whole bunch of different
things until you find the one that feels
like play to you, looks like work to
others. You can't lose at it.
Um get some leverage. try to find some
practical application of it and go into
that. And then where you live, uh where
you live is really important. I don't
think people spend enough time on that
one. I think people pick cities randomly
based on where I went to school or where
my family happened to be or where uh my
friend was or I visited one weekend. I
really liked it. You really want to
think it through because where you live
really constrains and defines your
opportunities. Um it uh it it's going to
determine your friend circle. It's going
to determine your dating pool. It's
going to determine your job
opportunities. It's going to determine
the food and air and water quality that
you receive. Um, it's going to determine
your proximity to your family, which
might be important as you get older and
have kids. So, very, very, very
important decision. Weather, you know,
quality of life. How much do you stay
inside or outside? How long are you
going to live based on that?
And I think people choose that one
probably more poorly than they put a lot
less thought into that one than the
other two.
I in some ways, yeah, but also the
You're so right. How many people fall
backward into a relationship and before
they know it, we're living together, we
got a dog, we got a kid, we were married
and you know,
yeah. And then when you have kids,
because then that's half of you and half
of them running around, you're never
going to separate yourself from that. So
once you have a child with somebody,
then the most important thing in the
world to you is half that other person
whether you like them or not.
Mhm. Yeah. Uh Jeffrey Miller had a tweet
a long time ago that I always think
about and he said every parenting book
in the world could be replaced with one
book on behavioral genetics that I am a
big believer in genetics. Yes, I do
think a lot of behavior is downstream of
genetics and I think we underplay that.
We like to overplay nurture and
underplay nurture for sorry underplay
nature for societal reasons but nature
is a big deal. Um the temperament of the
person you marry is probably going to be
reflected in your child by default.
people want securely attached kid, pick
a securely attached partner.
Well, the secret to a happy relationship
is two happy people, right? So, I would
say if you want to be happy, then uh be
with a happy person. Don't think you're
going to be with someone who's unhappy
and then make them happy down the road.
Or if you're okay with them being
unhappy, but there are other things you
like about them, that's fine. But this
goes back to the unhappiness with other
things. Yes. And actually we we talked a
little bit about how people do connect
successfully, you know, on spirit and
and those things, but that's maybe a
little too abstract. If you want to get
a little more practical, it could be
based on values. And values are a set of
things you won't compromise on. Values
are the tough decisions of, oh, my
parent got sick. Do they move in with us
or do we put them in a in a nursing
home? Uh, you know, the ch do we give
the children money or do we not? uh you
know do we um do we move across the
country to be closer to our family or do
we stay put where we are uh you know do
we argue about politics do we care or do
we not right the values are way more
important than checklist items
uh and uh I think if people were to
align much more on their values they
would have much more successful
relationships
the emotional pain of of fearing change
I have this thing the job the location
the partner I'm going to enter or not
enter this thing. For the most part,
it's leaving. I think we have this sort
of loss aversion that that we really
feel
evolved loss aversion. It's just painful
separating yourself in front of your
friends. It's embarrassing. And
how how would you advise people to uh
get past themselves with the loss
aversion? That fear of change. Oh my
god, am I going to
Yeah, it's the hardest thing in the
Uh starting over. It's back to the zero
to one thing. It's uh it's the mountain
climbing thing. You're not going to find
your path to the top of the mountain in
the first go around. Sometimes you go up
there, you get stuck, and you come back
down. And the difference between all the
successful people and the ones who are
not is the ones who are successful want
it so badly they're willing to go back
and start over again and again whether
in their career or in their
relationships or in anything else.
The more seriously you take yourself,
the unhappier you're going to be. You
learned how to take yourself less
seriously. Well, fame doesn't help on
that one because that is one of the
traps of fame. People are always talking
about you. they have a certain view of
you and you start believing that and
then you take yourself seriously and
then that limits your own actions. You
can't look like a fool anymore. Um you
can't do new things anymore. You know,
tomorrow I announce I'm a break dancer,
right? That's going to be met with a lot
of scorn and ridicule. But what if I
want to be back? I'd back I'd back you
if you want to make that.
Yeah. The truth is if I want to be a
break dancer, I'd be break dancing. But
uh you know like I'm starting a new
company 0ero to one again from scratch.
Let's do it you know one more time. uh
and not just going and raising a big VC
fund or retiring or what have you. But
that's because I want to build the
product. I want to see it exist. So I
think that you constantly just have to
force yourself. You have to remind
yourself. Um look, deep down you're
still the same Chris you were when you
were 9 years old. Deep down you're still
a kid. Uh you know, you're still curious
about the world. You still have a lot of
the same predilictions and desires and
wants. You've got a nice veneer on it.
But one of the nice things when you have
kids is you realize how much closer they
are to you in personality and knowledge
and knowhow. Like I look at my son who's
uh you know he's eight and uh I just
noticed like wow he's probably has 60 to
80% of my knowledge and development
wisdom and he has a lot more freedom and
he has a lot more spontaneity. In some
ways he's smarter and there's not a big
gap here left to close. this kid's going
to be, you know, done very soon. It
caught up to me.
And so to the extent that I think I know
better or that I'm somewhere or that I'm
someone, it's it's just an illusion.
It's is it's just a belief.
What's the lineage between that and
taking yourself too seriously?
I shouldn't take myself too seriously
because there's nothing here to take
that seriously. And if I take myself too
seriously, then I'm going to get
trapped. I'm going to get I'm going to
circumscribe myself again into a limited
set of behaviors and outcomes that keep
me from being free, keep me from being
spontaneous, keep me from being happy.
so it it just goes back to the, you
know, don't think about yourself too
much. There's a special type of pain in
realizing that the advice that you need
to hear right now is something that
almost always you learned a long time
ago and that you know you're basically
sort of the same person you were as you
were nine. You know a lot of the time
people ask questions like um what advice
do you wish that you would give yourself
10 years ago? People ask themselves that
question
almost invariably the advice that you
would give yourself 10 years ago is
still the advice that you need to hear
today.
Absolutely. That's why I did that
exercise of thinking back, you know, 10
years, 20 years, 30 years ago. What
advice would I give myself? For me, it's
just be less emotional.
Don't take don't take everything so
seriously. Do the same things, but do
them without all the emotional
turbulence.
And so, that's the advice I'm giving
myself going forward.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's funny how
we need that distance to be able to be a
little bit more objective, to have a
little bit more perspective. And it's
almost a little bit of a trick, right?
Because typically when you do that you
say what would you tell a friend that
was going through this
right
and then you try and turn the advice to
the friend around onto yourself but you
always think well I'm not the friend you
go okay you 10 years ago there's enough
distance in that you go oh I actually am
still that person there's just a single
line between that
and and related to this story is I think
understanding is way more important than
discipline now Jaco would have a fit but
you know on physical things discipline
is important if I want To build a good
body, I got to work out on a regular
basis. But on mental things, I think
understanding is way more important.
Once you see the truth of something, you
cannot unsee it. All of us have had
experiences where we've seen a behavior
in a person and then it just changes
what we think about that person. We no
longer want to be friends with them or
we deeply respect them if it was, you
know, really good behavior that maybe
was observed unintentionally. Um so when
we when we really do see something
clearly it changes our behavior
immediately and that is far more
efficient than trying to change your
behavior through repetition.
Could you give me an example?
Um if you were let's say that you know
you have a friend and then that person
turns out to be a thief. You see that
person stealing something you're done
with them.
uh if you are uh you know the the
smoking lung cancer example is a good
one right someone close to you or
anytime someone close to you dies or you
even hear about someone dying you hear
about someone dying what's the first
thing you do the first thing assuming
that you weren't that close to them
obviously you're close to them it's
different but if you weren't that close
to them but you know you hear about
someone in your extended social dying
you immediately start trying to
different distinguish yourself from them
you're like oh well how old was this
person you know did they have were they
a smoker you know did they have an issue
do I have that issue, right? You
immediately start comparing and what
what you're what you're doing there is
you're sort of just trying to see if
there's an overlap here. But if you see
the truth in something, if if you're
like, "Oh my god, this person was the
same age as me and they died." And
that's starting to happen at my age
where I'm starting to hear about, you
know, extended circle people
just reminds you time is really short.
There's a truth there. There's a truth
there that you cannot action.
There's a truth there that you cannot
unsee. Uh, you know, or for example, I
think were you into bodybuilding or
something back when? I don't know.
Like bro lifting stuff of a skinny
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Yeah.
Right. But there probably was a point
where you were uh being really aggro in
the gym and you injured yourself
many times.
Right. And each one of those was an deep
understanding of don't go beyond this
point, right? There was a truth there.
So again, when you when you see these
things in such a way that you can't
unsee them, that changes your behavior
instantly. And I would argue that that
introspection to find those truths is
actually very useful. Is that a
justification for more experimentation,
exploration,
experience in life, sort of trying to
find serendipity because all of these
experiences are going to teach you a
inescapable lesson.
You're going to do what you're going to
do. I mean, your level of exploration, I
think, is sort of up to you. But life is
always throwing truth back at you. Uh,
it's about whether you choose to see it,
whether you choose to acknowledge it.
Uh, even if it's painful. Truth is often
painful, right? If it wasn't, we'd all
be seeing truth all the time. Reality is
always reflecting truth. That's all it
is.
Why would you not have accessed it
already?
Exactly. Uh, you know, all the all the
philosophy that's out there, for
example, uh, it's almost trit. Like most
people they look at philosophy like
until they discover it for themselves
and because because wisdom is the set of
things that that cannot be transmitted.
If they could be transmitted, you know,
we'd read the same five philosophy books
and we'd all be done. We'd all be wise.
You have to learn it for yourself. It
has to be rediscovered for yourself in
your own context. You have to have
specific experiences that then allow you
to generalize and see the truth in those
things in such a way that you're not
going to unsee them. But each person is
going to see them in a different way. I
can tell you that Socrates story and
it's not going to resonate until there's
something that other people desire that
you realize you yourself don't want. And
the moment that happens, then you'll see
the truth in the general statement.
I want to just read you a twominute
essay that I wrote uh a couple of weeks
ago. So, it's called unteachable
lessons.
I've been thinking about a special
category of lesson, one which you cannot
discover without experiencing it
firsthand. There is a certain subset of
advice that for some reason we all
refuse to learn through instruction.
These are unteachable lessons. No matter
how arduous or costly or effortful it is
going to be for us to find out
ourselves, we prefer to disregard the
mountains of warnings from our elders,
songs, literature, historical
catastrophes, public scandals, and
instead think some version of, "Yeah,
that might be true for them, but not for
me." We decide to learn the hard lessons
the hard way over and over again.
Unfortunately, they all seem to be the
big things, too. It's never new insights
about how to put up level shelves or
charmingly introduce yourself at a
cocktail party. Instead, we spend most
of our lives learning firsthand the most
important lessons that the previous
generations already warned us about.
Things like money won't make you happy.
Fame won't fix your self worth. You
don't love that pretty girl. She's just
hot and difficult to get. Nothing is as
important as you think it is when you're
thinking about it. You will regret
working too much. Worrying is not
improving your performance. All your
fears are a waste of time. You should
see your parents more. You'll be fine
after the breakup and will be grateful
that you did it. It's perfectly okay to
cut toxic people out of your life. And
even reading this list back, I'm rolling
my eyes at how [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] trite it is.
These are all basic [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] obvious
insights that everybody has heard
before. But if they're so basic, why
does everyone so reliably fall prey to
them throughout our lives? And if
they're so obvious, why do people who
have recently become famous or wealthy
or lost a parent or gone through a
breakup start to proclaim these facts
with the renewed grandio ceremony of
someone who's just gone through
religious revelation? It's also a very
contentious list of points to say on the
internet. If you interview a billionaire
who says that all of his money didn't
make him happy, or a movie star who said
that her fame felt like a prison, the
internet will tear them apart for being
ungrateful and out of touch. So, not
only do we refuse to learn these
lessons, we even refuse to hear the
message from those warning us about
them. And even more than that, I think
for every one of these, if I consider a
bit deeper, I can recall a time,
including right now, where I convinced
myself that I am the exception to the
rule. That my particular mental makeup
or life situation or historical wounds
or dreams for the future render me
immune to these lessons being
applicable. No, no, no. My inner
landscape would be solved by skirting
around the most well-known wisdom of the
ages. No, no, no. I can thread this
needle properly. Watch me dance through
the minefield and avoid all of the trip
wires that everyone else kicks. And then
you kick one. And you share a knowing
luck, the kind that can only occur
between two people who have been hurt in
the exact same way. And a voice in the
back of your mind will say, "I told you
so."
That's unable.
It's a good essay. I I think one of the
reasons why these lessons are
unteachable is because uh they're too
broad. They have to be applied in
context. A number of the ones that you
laid out contradict each other. Like
spend more time with your parents and
you know don't work so hard but you know
at the same time you do want to be
successful, right? I think I think a lot
of these lessons come from down on high
from as you said like the famous movie
star or the billionaire saying oh you
don't need to be happy. It's like well
okay then give it up [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] right? Uh so
in reality I think many of these
contradict each other and they it's like
if you went to school and you just
studied philosophy for four years you
would not know how to live life because
you wouldn't know which philosophical
doctrine to apply in which circumstance.
Uh you have to actually live life go
through all of the issues to figure out
what it is that you want. What's the
context in which some of these things
apply and some of them don't. Um, yes,
you want to visit your parents more
often, but you don't want to live with
your parents and you don't want to
necessarily see them every day or every
weekend depending on the parent. You
might not get along with one of them.
So, I think it is highly contextual. Um,
that said, I I I would argue that once
you figure it out for yourself, you can
kind of carve these variations on these
maxims that apply to you and uh then
you'll have a specific experience that
helps you remember it and actually
execute on it. And you can also phrase
it in a way where it's not trit anymore.
So like
Yeah. So so a lot of my maxims and notes
to self are carved in a way that they're
modernized. They're saying something
true which might be trit if I didn't say
it in a new way or in an interesting way
that is more relevant to me today.
There was a Nobel Prize winner who said
something to the effect of uh everything
worth saying may have been said before
but given that nobody was listening it
must be said again.
Yeah. It has to be said again has to be
recontextualized for the modern age.
things do change, technology changes,
things culture changes, people change.
on that. I've heard you say uh you talk
about the difference between seeming
wise and being wise that uh you tried to
appear smart as a kid uh by sort of
wrote memorization masquerading as
insight and wisdom and uh I I certainly
feel that you know a lot of the show for
me I think has been was and still is a
redemption arc from this you know decade
of my life where I completely suppressed
any intellectual curiosity. It's like,
okay, I'll be a professional party boy
for 10 years, stand on the front door of
a nightclub and give out VIP wristbands
and have access to all of the pretty
girls or, you know, the cool parties or
whatever it might be.
Seems like it worked out. Okay,
it did in some ways. I mean,
isn't that fun?
It's it it was look, it was a good way
to spend my 20ies, but to sort of
come back above, put your head above
water, two degrees, one of which was a
masters, and then this like just shut
down any of that learn. I mean, I I did
that while I was at uni. While I was at
uni, I was running the events. So, it's
actually a decade and a half. And uh I
think there was a big redemption arc
within this show. And I I constantly
have to kind of
wipe the slime off me of this sense that
I need to prove myself. And so much of
it, this why it really resonates with
me. Um when you're memorizing things
that indicates that you don't understand
them or that sort of yeah, wrote
memorization and regurgitation
masquerading as wisdom. Um because
people use fluency as a proxy for
truthfulness and insight. They use the
complexity of your language and your
communication.
Yeah. There's a lot of jargon out there.
I think it's it's it's the mark of a
charlatan to explain a simple thing in a
complex way. And so when you see people
using very complicated language to
explain simple things, they're either
trying to impress you and offiscate or
they don't understand it themselves.
Well, there's an allure in that though.
You know, this was one of the things I
had to do when I went to therapy. It's
kind of an interesting I think I've
talked about this before. Um, I needed
to turn off podcast Chris when I stepped
into therapy because most of the time
that I spend one-on-one in a deep
conversation that's undistracted
throughout the week. I trained myself
over, you know, when I started doing it
700 episodes now, 900, whatever. Uh, and
I I knew what I could do to say to this
therapist some, you know, to just sort
of veer off a little and create some
nice story, put a bow on it, push it
across the table, and watch your eyes
light up a little bit, like a little
grin or a self-deprecating joke or
whatever. I'm like, you're not here.
You're you're performing. You're doing
this. You're doing the Chris Williamson
thing with the sort of jazz hands.
So, I have my own version.
Okay, tell me.
Okay, so you have podcast Chris. I have
podcast guest Naval.
Precisely. So very often I'll uh think
of something. I'll have some what I
think is an insight and I want to tweet
it or write it down, but in my mind I'm
talking about it on a podcast. That's
kind of how my mind registers it. And
for a while I thought this was a bad
thing and I tried to eradicate podcastal
and then I just realized that's just how
it comes out. So I might as well just be
okay with it.
Now do you know the reason I'm on this
podcast? No. You know, I haven't done a
proper formal interview straight up top
whatever 10 20 podcasts in a long time
since Rogan maybe.
Probably since Rogan. Yep. Yeah, it went
out at the top, right? That was a
theory.
Yeah. Well, it's still at the top.
Yeah. Yeah, I know. And and then, you
know, I've done some stuff with Tim Tim
Ferrris, a good friend, but that's been
more co-hosting. I haven't been a guest.
Um, and then I did one or two random
things where I just stumbled into a
thing where I, you know, there was a
reason, but it wasn't like this.
And I reached out to you for this one,
right? I have lots of people reaching
out to me for podcasts. I do not answer
them. I reached out to you.
And the reason is a really funny one.
It's because when I am playing podcast
in the vault in my head, for some
reason, you're on the other side. And I
don't know why. I literally don't know
why. It's not like I've even seen many
of your podcasts. I think I've seen some
snippets here and there, but for some
reason, you were the guy in the podcast
in podcast.
And so, I was like, I might as well just
do it. So, I reached out to you. I
wonder if this will close that loop or
further entrench it. I wonder if you've
made it way worse now and you're just
gonna have Well, first off, it was a
dream and now it's reality plus a dream
and I can't get away from him.
Yeah, there are enough people that I
turned down where I said I'm just not
doing podcasts. I feel bad about that. I
got to go back and do those podcasts.
But I probably wear out my luck. I have
nothing new to talk about. So, I don't
know what I'm going to say.
Well, I appreciate you you said on Rogan
and this was something, you know, to
kind of pay it back to you. Uh, I had a
a fiveheaded Mount Rushmore of guests
before I started this show and it was
Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris, Alanderon
from the School of Life, you and Rogan,
and that was my uh hydra of Mount
Rushmore.
And uh I knew I think someone had asked
you at some point, maybe it was a tweet
or something after Rogan or maybe even
said it on Rogan where you said, "Uh, I
don't like to say the same thing twice,
at least not in the same way."
I don't like sequels. Yeah.
Yeah. And I really really respected
that. You know, that was 2019. You said
it was uh eight or nine years ago. It
wasn't as long ago as you.
I have a terrible memory.
Yeah. Yeah. Um
you're right. 2019 right before co
Yes. And uh I really appreciated that
because there is something
the content game you can continue to
sort of I'm sure I'll have said many
things today that the the audience will
have already heard but uh
caring enough about having novel
insights or at least having a new
perspective on similar insights to say
oh well you know in the space of six
years since you were on Joe a lot of
these well I'm coming at them actually
the first thing I said to you today like
I'm not convinced that I actually fully
agree with that thing that I used to
say, which is cool, right? That's you
showing that the um position that you
put in the ground previously is not a
tether. It's not you being held to it
anymore.
Well, I I think the reason why I wanted
to be on this is because
for some reason I have the impression
that you engage in conversations and I
like conversations. I don't like
interviews. Mhm.
This is why I was doing my last startup
air chat, which was all about
conversations.
And conversations to me are more
genuine. They're more authentic. There's
a give and take. There's a back and
forth. There's a genuine curiosity. It's
not to say the other podcasters don't do
it. They absolutely do do it. But for
some reason in my mind, I had you as a
guy that I would actually have a
conversation with. And sure enough, you
just read me your essay, which I don't
think anybody else would really do,
right? That implies there's a give and
take. There's a genuine curiosity. And I
think that's useful because then uh
certain inexplicit knowledge that I had
will be surfaced for myself. And I think
that's helpful.
Well, you're seeing, you know, to kind
of break the fourth wall a bit, you're
seeing very much of uh some of the
gateway drug insights that you had that
you just don't get to choose. I'm aware
that you kind of have an anti-guru
sentiment in you, like a very strong
like don't listen to me. I don't know
what I'm doing.
Is a trap. No, guru is a trap. do not
follow me, do not bow to me, do not do
any of the other things to me. But, uh,
if you see resonance in another person,
and I think this is what we're all
trying to find. You know, people can
complain about the mountains of content
creation that happens and and maybe
rightly so. Um, but if you're able to
find someone and you see in them a
little bit of you, maybe not even much
of you, but like, oh, that bit of them,
their self-esteem or the way they look
at relationships or what they want to
do, the kind of life they want or the
level of peace of mind that they want to
have or whatever it might be.
If you find in somebody else a little
bit of that, it's kind of like what
you're saying before, you can't you can
no longer be unconvinced of that and it
it steps in and becomes a part of you.
And uh yeah, you're maybe seeing
reflected back to you some you know this
sort of percolated very meandering
insight from however long ago that
something's happened and maybe in you
know 5 years time you'll be like you
know that thing that you said about the
lessons and then I don't know it's cool
that's like synthesis right it's this
sort of blending of the reason I spend a
lot of time in San Francisco is because
it's a gravitational attractor for the
smartest people in the world and despite
all the many problems the city had is
mismanaged beyond belief. Um it does
just seem to pull in the young smart
creative people. Uh not just the ones
who are building technology, but they're
exploring every facet of life and
they're weird and sometimes it's
repulsive and it's bizarre, but you talk
to these people and you just see a very
intelligent person coming at life in a
completely different way. um putting it
through the cominatorics of human DNA
which are uncountable and giving you a
weird perspective that can twist your
mind around. And to do that, you always
have to be learning. You you have you
can't be in a guru mentality. If I'm
with somebody and they're listening to
every word I say and hanging on it,
that's not interesting for me. I'm not
going to learn anything. Um, I want
people who are intelligent, who will say
something back that is a little
different and I may not agree with it,
but it's going to leave a mark. It's
going to leave an impression
and it's going to leave an impression to
the extent that both that they are
correct and that I choose to listen and
I'll choose to listen if I don't view
myself as higher status or smarter than
them. The flip side of that is I'm not
really impressed by high status people
like I don't just because the case
pretty much in fact uh most of my
friends who have gone on to become very
uh famous or successful the more famous
successful they've been the less I spend
time with them um partially because they
get surrounded by an army of sickop fans
which gets hard to break through uh and
because I don't want anything from them
and I don't and I don't like that I
don't like these situations in which
transactional relationships are
implied that can be a though to people
who are up that because the higher that
they climb up that hierarchy, the fewer
and fewer people don't want anything
from them. So in that way you have an
even better friend,
right? But they get they get surrounded
by people who do want things from them
and are so good at pretending they don't
that it's just not worth my time to try
and break out from that group.
Um so it does get lonely at the top so
to speak. But it's also by choice
because you know it's
you can problem.
Yeah, you can be your own best friend
too. I am my own best friend actually.
So, I really do enjoy spending time with
myself.
Yeah. The smartest people aren't
interested in appearing smart and don't
care what you think is.
Yeah. I mean, a a lot of life is not
giving a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] You know, a lot of the
best things in life come out of that.
Does this mean
sort of talking about that wrote
memorization masquerading as wisdom and
insight thing which I think
perhaps almost certainly uh podcasts
like this will have contributed to. you
know, you hear a an Alanderoton who's,
you know, like a painter with words. Uh,
very simple, very sort of unpretentious,
but if you're intellectually curious,
you see, you only see the production of
his thoughts. You don't necessarily see
the work that's gone into the thoughts
behind. So, you confuse the presentation
of them for the insight. Does that make
sense?
Of course. Yeah. A lot of my stuff is
more polished. Like one of the funny
things, yeah, one of the funny things
that uh right before this uh podcast was
I thought maybe I should go back and
read my old tweets
to sort of remember what I said and I
can articulate it well. But then I
realized that's just performance. I
would just be memorizing my whole stuff
to perform. I
Well, that's an extra special level of
hell that you've descended into. I wrote
memorizing me to be more mely.
Bingo. And and to live up to some
expectation or some uh famous
personality that I now have to become
some straight jacket that I have to put
on. I'm having to live up to in private
the things that I prefer.
That's right. So, of course, pretty
quickly I saw through that, you know,
it's nonsense and it also constrains my
time and it's just work and it
I think that's that's, you know, your
meditation practice at work there, that
mindfulness gap to be like, huh?
Yeah, there's that thing again in
Exactly. Exactly. So, it's not about
changing your thoughts. It's not about
fixing your thoughts. It's not about
changing yourself. It's just about being
observant of yourself so that you can
then it'll automatically change.
Whatever change needs to happen will
happen. you trying to change yourself is
very circular. Um the mind trying to
change the mind, the mind doesn't like
wrestling with itself. I don't I don't
think it gets you anywhere.
You've spent a lot of time either
creating wealth or thinking about how to
create wealth. What have you learned are
the best places to spend wealth?
To spend wealth.
Yeah. Yeah. How you you spend this time
creating this wealth
accumulating? How does what are the best
ways for you to put it back out?
I actually think Elon had this one
figured out, which is he plowed his own
money back into his own businesses to go
and do bigger and better things for
humanity. Um, so what I would like to,
you know, you could give it to
nonprofits, but a lot of nonprofits are
grifty or it's people who didn't earn it
trying to spend it or they don't have
tight feedback loops on having a good
effect. So, one of the things I want to
do as an aside is I want to create a
little school for young physicists. But
that's that's my nonprofit.
A young physicist.
Yeah, that that that's my nonprofit
thing. But uh and I've been and I've
actually uh underwritten uh
media and some physics stuff. I don't
like to talk about it. So I don't I
don't talk about my whatever so-called
philanthropy because I think that makes
it less real. That makes it more status
oriented.
Makes it less philanthropic.
Yeah. Exactly. And then people
look at how charitable my charity is.
And then people also come hunting for
money. So there's all that disease. I
don't believe in giving to schools. They
have enough money. Ivy Leagues have
enough money and they don't know how to
spend it.
So I think the best use of money is I
think a good business creates a product
for people that they voluntarily buy and
they get value out of. So in that sense
I think Steve Jobs and Elon and and uh
entrepreneurs like that have created a
lot of value for the world. So one of
the things I can do is I can take my own
money and I can invest it in myself to
go and build the next great thing that I
think needs to exist. And that's
basically what I'm doing right now. I'm
doing a new business. I'm self-unding
it. Um, I'm plying a lot of money into
it. I'm going to build something that I
think is beautiful, that I want to see
exist. Um, I really want to see exist.
Have you spoken about this yet or is it
still dark mode?
It's so early. It's Yeah, maybe I'll
show it to you in a few months. Uh,
hopefully 6 months.
Um, and uh, I'm excited about it and
that's a good use of money.
What about the worst places to spend
wealth?
What is the old line? If it flies,
floats or fornicates. Well, very nice
way to change the final F. Very
impressive.
That's the way I heard it. Can't take
credit for that.
I'm pretty sure it's Fox, but yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. I think that was u
Maybe it was uh Felix Dennis.
Who who had that quote.
Yeah. He said, "If a flies floats or
fornicates rented I I think the last one
was a little too
it's wrong that he he didn't have a
family, didn't have kids." So, you know,
he missed the big one.
but yeah, there there are lots of bad
ways to spend money. Uh I I I believe in
investment, you know, I don't believe in
consumption. Uh yes, you can you're born
with a short housing position. You close
that out, you get yourself a nice house.
Um get yourself some help to free up
your time so you're not doing uh things
that other people can do better. Um
treat people well. You know, always
overpay and expect the best.
Uh pay them like they're the best and
expect the best. Um, but overall I think
a good use of money is to take risks and
build things and do things that other
people can't do. Align it with your own
unique talent so you can keep delivering
to the world. I'm not going to sit idle.
Uh, I'm not going to retire. That's a
that's a waste of whatever time I have
left on this earth.
Um, and if I'm doing something I enjoy,
then I'm already in perpetual
retirement. Um,
because work is just a set of things you
want to do that that that you have to do
that you don't want to do. So if you
want to do it, it's not work. Um, and so
there are things that I want to do don't
feel like work. I can put money behind
them and I can use that to make
instantiate them into reality. And I
don't want to say make the world a
better place cuz that's too trit, but
it's more just create a product that I'm
proud of that wouldn't exist otherwise
that other people will get tremendous
value.
And it's been enabled through wealth
because you're able to take a level of
risk that you wouldn't have been able to
otherwise.
Exactly. Yeah. Wealth gives you freedom.
It gives you freedom to explore more
options. And in my case, it gives me
freedom to start businesses without
having to ask other people for
permission or to warp my vision based on
uh their desires to make a return or how
they think money should be made.
Is there anything that you'd add to the
how to get rich thread? Is there
anything where you thought [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like
just one if I could go in and edit and
add one more in or or
No, there's like 10,000 things. I could
talk about that topic forever to be
honest. like that that that thread was
so short and it was so limited and it
was so like you know crafted in a sense
although I wrote it very spontaneously
um it left so much on the cutting room
floor that I could just talk about that
topic for days but
it's all contextual right business is
very very very contextual like you have
to look at the particular business and
understand what's being done and why
it's being done and how it's being done
and then you can tear it apart or you
can re and then reassemble it properly
um and I like to think that That is
actually where I have specific knowledge
and expertise. My specific knowledge,
expertise is not in happiness, not in
philosophy, not Yes, my life is very
hacked to be very unique.
But I don't think that's where my
specific knowledge is. My specific
knowledge is in being able to analyze a
business, especially a technology
business, and take it apart at the seams
and predict in advance what is likely to
work and what is not likely to work.
clubhouse notwithstanding.
Um because you're still going to be
wrong most of the time. It's like
playing the lottery, but you know one or
two of the tickets numbers in advance.
You only have to be right a few times or
even just once to to get the big score.
Um you know, Peter Thiel started PayPal,
but he made all his money on Facebook,
right? And now he's done more since
then, obviously. But that was the big
winner. And that's true in any power law
distribution. Number one is going to
return more than two through n put
together. Two will return more than
three through put together. you're
operating in a highly leveraged
intellectual domain. So the outcomes are
going to be nonlinear. Um so I I know a
lot about that topic, but it's highly
contextual. It makes a lot more sense if
there's a specific business in front of
me, a specific entrepreneur, and I can
take that apart and I can say, you know,
so there are certain companies where
I'll say, "Oh, this is not going to work
because you, the entrepreneur, are doing
this for the wrong reasons. You're
you're doing A so you can get to B. Just
go to B." Or, "You're doing this to make
money." when really the person who's
doing this because they love the product
is going to beat you or you're raising
money from the wrong people who are in
it for the wrong reasons or your
co-founder is not in it for the right
reasons or you don't have the right kind
of co-founder or your vesting schedule
is wrong or you're starting the business
in the wrong place or you're approaching
it from this angle instead of that angle
and and of course I'll be wrong too but
I've just seen a lot of data I have my
theories around it uh and that's where I
feel very comfortable operating the
problem is when I have to talk about how
to create wealth and how to get rich is
a clickbait title deliberately. But when
I talk about how to create wealth,
talking about it in the abstract is very
difficult because then you just want to
speak truth. You have to just say the
timeless stuff. You have to be right in
almost every context and so it really
limits what you can say.
The lack of specificity makes it Yeah.
Correct. It's back to philosophy. But
when I if I can get specific about it,
you know, that's when that's when the
real knowledge could be like a counselor
for people.
Yeah. part of the reason why I started
doing podcasts and you know this is ego
at play so I'll admit it freely when I
was tweeting you know I kind of
pioneered philosophy Twitter if you will
or a certain kind of practical
philosophy Twitter where in 140
characters I would try to say something
true in an interesting way that was
insightful to me at the time but then
that got copied there's thousands of us
now right thousands of people spitting
it out chat GPT trying to create these
things all day long um although I like
to say I like to think that my stuff is
incompressible I'm saying it in the
tightest way possible.
Um, which is kind of a little failed
poetry background. Um, but what I
realized was if you truly have a deep
understanding of something, then you can
talk about it all day long. Then you can
rederive everything you need from that
understanding. No memorization required.
You can get to it from first principles
and every piece of what you know is is
like a it's like a Lego block that just
fits in and forms a steel frame. It's
solid. It's locked in there. And so on a
podcast, I can unload much more deeply
about some of these topics. Um, so for
example, we can talk about any business
you like, but it has to be in context.
It has to be real. It has to be an
actual problem. Then we can solve it.
I I just really love that heristic of if
you're having to memorize something,
it's because you don't understand it.
You don't understand it. That's right.
If you if you if you have to memorize
something, it's because you don't
understand it. And if you understand
something, you don't have to memorize
Yeah. I again, you know, just to sort of
call out
a lot of what I tried to do this
redemption arc thing of if I sound
smart, that's like being smart, right?
You go, well, chat GPT has memorized the
entire internet. Good luck competing
with that.
You're not going to beat it in
memorization. You're not even going to
beat a library at memorization. You're
not going to beat any 10 books in
memorization. So memorization is not the
thing. Understand
the value of memorization is going down
by the day.
It's already so low. Understanding is a
thing. Being able to being able Judgment
is the thing. Taste is a thing. Um, and
understanding, judgment, taste, these
come out of having real problems and
then solving them and then finding the
commonalities. What is philosophy?
Everyone, you live long enough, you'll
be a philosopher. Philosophy is just
when you find the hidden generalizable
truths among the specific experiences
that you've had in life
and then you know how to navigate future
specific experiences based on some
heristics and you create a philosophy
around that. Any subject pursued deeply
enough will eventually lead to
philosophy. Mastery in anything,
literally anything, will lead you to
being a philosopher. You just have to
stick with it long enough and generalize
the truths back out. And these are
universal truths. It's back to the unity
and variety. You can find you can find
unity in anything if you go deep enough.
And that's why the trit stuff
unfortunately sort of keeps coming back
around. You're like, well, look, this is
cliche for kind of a reason.
It's cliche for reasons. Uh but, you
know, sometimes you learn new things.
Sometimes you do figure out new things
too. Uh even even in philosophy for
example science has advanced as science
has advanced it's actually expanded our
boundaries of philosophy. Um when we
used to think that uh you know the earth
was the center of the universe you would
actually have a different philosophical
outlook than when you think the universe
is vast and we're infantestimally small.
It will give you a different
philosophical outlook. uh the same way
if you think that uh the nature is
driven by angels and demons and gods
versus if there are laws of physics that
are computable and understandable that
will lead you to a different
philosophical outlook.
Uh if you think that knowledge is
something that is passed down from above
and through generations versus something
that is created on the fly and then
tested against reality that will lead
you to a different philosophical
outlook. If you think humans are created
by God as opposed to humans evolved from
some, you know, unicellular organism,
yeah, it still doesn't solve the
original problem. Who created that? But
at least it takes you further down the
down the road.
Even sim theory is an attempt at
reformulating philosophy based on what
we know about computers, even though it
kind of leads to a lot of the same
conclusions as you know creator.
But it it it is at least philosophy that
is informed by technology and by
science. So philosophy can also invol
evolve moral philosophy evolves right uh
there was a time when every culture
practically that was a conquering
culture practice slavery now almost all
cultures abort slavery that's moral
philosophy having evolved
um you know there was even like this
sounds too ludicrous to be true and I
don't know if it fully is true but there
were a a fairly large group of doctors
based on studies who believed until the
1980s that babies couldn't feel pain and
so even to this day I think circumcision
is done without anesthesia and because
under the theory that you know very
young children babies don't feel pain
and that's ludicrous and there was a
study that came out in the 80s that said
no no no they do feel pain it's like oh
yeah of course right
so people can be stuck in bad
philosophical traps for a long period of
time so even philosophy can make
progress and uh as an example one of the
realizations that I had and this is
thanks to uh David Deutsch and my friend
James Pierce and also thinking it
through a little bit is that there are
these timeless old questions that we run
into where the answers seem like
paradoxes. So we stop thinking about
them. So an example is free will. Do you
have free will? Or does anything matter?
Is there a meaning to life? And
there and and we get stuck in them
because for example, is there a meaning
to life? Like yes, life has a meaning
because you're you're right here. You
create your own meaning. This this
moment has all the meaning you could
imagine. It's all the meaning there is.
On the other hand, you're going to die.
It all goes to zero. Heat. Death. The
universe has no meaning. Right? So which
one is it? Well,
the reason why it seems paradoxical is
because you're asking the question of a
human here and now at a certain scale
and a certain time and then you're
answering it from the viewpoint of the
universe over infinite time. So, you
pull the trick. You switch the level at
which you're answering the question. And
questions should be answered at the
level at which they're asked. So, if you
ask the question, is there meaning? You,
Chris, are asking that question. Yes.
Yes. To Chris, there is meaning. There's
meaning right here. This is the meaning.
you can interpret any meaning you want
onto it. Um, don't ask the question as
Chris and then answer it as God or as
the universe. That's the trick that
you're playing. That's why it seems
paradoxical. The same way you can say,
do I have free will? People debate free
will all day long. This the question is
answered at the wrong frame. So they ask
the question is do I as an individual
have free will? Hell yeah, I have free
will. My mind body system can't predict
what I'm going to do next. The universe
is infinitely complex. I'm making a
choice in my mind and I'm doing
something. There's my free will. So
answer at the level at which you were
asked. Of course I have free will
because I feel like I have free will and
I treat you like you have free will and
you treat me like I have free will. We
have free will. The problem then is you
start trying to answer the question as
if you're the universe. You're like well
on the universal scale big bang particle
collisions. No one makes any choices.
You know how could you be any different
than the what the universe wants you to
be and it's all one block universe. So
you don't have free will.
Don't answer the question at the level
at which it wasn't asked. So if God
asked the question is there free will?
No there is no free will. the universe
asks a question, there is no free will.
But if an individual asks a question
right now, then yes, there is free will.
So a lot of these paradoxes resolve
themselves, philosophical paradoxes that
people have been struggling with since
the beginning of time when you just
realize there you're you're answering
them at a scale and time different than
they were asked.
Speaking of updating beliefs, is there
anything that you've changed your mind
around recently?
Very recently. I mean, all the time. Uh,
but are you talking about like
philosophical existential things or like
technological things? Yeah,
philosophical existential things or
anything that comes to mind. If there's
anything that's front of mind where you
go, ah, yeah, that's a pretty big OS
update.
Yeah, I'm less lazy fair than I used to
be on a societal level. I think that
culture and religion are good
cooperating systems for humans. And so
if you want to operate in a high trust
society, you need to have sets of rules
that people need to follow and obey so
they get along even if they're, you
know, one sizefits-all doesn't work for
everybody.
Moved up a little bit from libertarian.
Yeah. I think pure libertarians get out
competed and die, right? They get
overrun because they're every man for
himself.
They can't coordinate.
They can't coordinate. Exactly. Right.
Um so the coordination problems, right?
Culture exists to solve fundamental
coordination problems. Religion solves
coordination problems. Ethnicity solves
coordination problems historically.
Um and when you uh break down those
coordination systems too fast and don't
replace them with anything else, you get
societal breakdown. So you can have very
malfunctioning societies. you know, go
to Japan versus go to any western city
and you can see the difference being a a
culture that's working and a culture
that's not.
Um, so I I think that that's like a a
broader set of things that I've changed
my mind on
uh a fair bit. I used to be much more
lazy fair on that stuff, let's put it
that way.
Mhm.
Um, what else? I mean, on child raising,
I've gotten a lot looser. You know, I'm
still not like completely less afair,
but I'm much more realized like kids are
going to be kids and you kind of let
them do their thing.
The debate with them. Is it a Talib that
has the ascending levels of like
anarchism versus conservatism? Is that
his insight? Like at the local level,
I'm this. It seems like you've gone the
other way. It's like at the child level
I'm an anarchist and at the societal
level I'm a conservative. No, he he was
quoting somebody else, some brothers, I
forget which ones, but he was making the
point eloquently as he often does. Uh
that
uh at you know at at at the family local
level he's a communist. At the family
level you're communist. uh at maybe the
the extended family level you're a
socialist at the local level, you know,
you're kind of a uh a democrat and so on
until at the federal level you're a
libertarian, right? So,
you've done it the other way. You're
being a libertarian with the kids and
you're being a religious conservative
and societal.
No, that's that's that's a that's a
funny way of looking at it. I I don't
know if the scale is that
that simple. Um what else have I changed
my mind on? I mean, I think a modern AI
is really cool. I think it's but I think
these are natural language computers. Um
they're starting to show evidence of
kind of uh reasoning at some levels but
I don't think they do creativity. I
think modern AI
one of so just on that one of my
favorite takes is from Dwash Patel and
he says um
uh if you gave any human on the planet
0.0 0 0 0.1% of the consumption that a
LLM has. Any LLM, they would have come
up with thousands of new ideas,
right?
Give me one new idea, one fundamental
new idea that's been generated.
Yeah. Like I'm big into poetry. Every
poem ever written by an LLM is garbage.
I think even their fiction writing is
terrible. Even the new GPT45, with all
due respect to Sam and Crew, uh I I
think they're terrible, terrible
writers. I find them really bad at
summarizing. They're really good at
extrapolating, you know, paperwork. um
they're very bad at actually distilling
the essence of something and what's
important. They don't have an opinions
or a point of view. But they're still
unbelievably powerful breakthroughs.
They solve search. They solve natural
language computing. They make English a
programming language. They solve
driving. They solve uh simple coding and
backup coding. They solve translation.
They solve transcription. Um they are a
fundamental breakthrough in computing.
It is a different way to program a
computer. rather than you explicitly
speak its language and write the code
and then run the data through it. You
just run enough data through it until it
figures out how to write the program.
That's huge. Um but are they are they
AGI? Not yet. And I don't see a direct
path from here to there. Um maybe we'll
have to solve a few more problems before
that happens. And I think ASI is a
fantasy. I don't think there's any such
thing as uh artificial super
intelligence where it has some kind of
intelligence that humans can't fathom.
Okay. Uh yeah, it seems like I don't
know if you're from the boss room camp
or whatever in
No, I'm not an AI doomer. I think that's
such a flawed line of reasoning. But
let's say that you know you came out of
the less wrong.com like slate style
codec world and
there was this sort of lineage from
computers and AI gets more powerful more
powerful more powerful and then you end
up AGI ASIS
and it seems like LLMs have been this
sort of orthogonal move from that which
are you saying you don't believe they
are a step on that it's kind of a little
bit of a traditional branch
I think Steven Wolf puts it better it's
a different form of intelligence it's
like if you see Jaguar in the jungle, it
has a different form of intelligence in
your like a plant has a form of
intelligence how it can like
photosynthesize and grow. It's a
different form of intelligence. It's not
and intelligence again like love or like
happiness is this overloaded word that
means many things to many people.
But by my definition where you know the
true test is you get what you want out
of life. It doesn't even have a life. It
doesn't even want anything. It's a
different thing.
Um I do think it's unbelievably useful.
I'm glad that it exists. You don't see
it much yet in large scale production
systems replacing humans because this
tendency to hallucinate. So you can't
put it into anything mission critical
confidently wrong one time out of 10.
Correct. And it doesn't even know when
it's wrong. Uh and maybe they'll get
that one out of 10 down to one out of
100. But you'll kind of always want
human oversight for critical critical
things.
I I always feel so bitter. It's I'm
petty sometimes. My my less economist
version of me is petty and I always want
to like teach it a lesson if it gets
something wrong. like how the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like
no you were so confident I'm treating it
but I'm anthropomorizing anthropology
it doesn't have a point of view and they
are going to get a lot better and they
might get to the point where the error
rates are so low that you can put them
into certain bounded problems like
self-driving I think will be solved
completely uh because it's a bounded
problem cars don't you know go like
off-road and drive through houses and
stuff like that right so because and and
same way like certain kinds of coding
the creative side of coding I think
doesn't go away I think if anything
programmers get even more leverage and
more powerful And rather than computing
replacing programmers, programmers use
AI to replace everybody else.
On Tesla versus Whimo, would you bet on
software or hardware for self-driving?
Yeah. So the I think Tesla's in the
stronger, longer term position, but it's
hard to argue with what's working right
now. And Whimo is working right now. So
I would not underestimate them because
there's a learning curve that you go
through when you actually deploy
something. And Whimo is way ahead in
that regard. But Tesla's camera only
approach if it works uh is a superior.
It's much more scalable and Tesla knows
how to print cars, right? They can just
mass manufacture cars. But I think I
think they'll both be around. They'll
both be fine. It's everybody else who
doesn't have a self-driving vehicle
that's screwed.
You mentioned uh kids there and you had
a tweet that said, "I'm not convinced
that declining fertility needs to be
proactively fought."
I forgot that one.
You're going to have to I'm I dug deep.
Um why? Well, I mean, think back like
what was it 30 years ago, 20 years ago?
Everybody was saying overpopulation of
the earth is going to be a problem.
Malthusian ending, we're going to have
too many people. And now all of a sudden
we're going to have too few people. So
part of it is just the doomerism meme is
always alive and well, right? Or it just
gets repackaged.
Yeah. We're running out of oil. We have
too much oil, right? You know, it's like
the world is cooling, the world is
warming. Like there's always something
to scream about. The world is ending. Uh
there's no progress in technology. AI is
going to blow up the world, right? So
people tend to overdo in both
directions. Now, what is the actual
fertility problem, right? Well, people
are having less kids. Are they having
less kids because there's a disease? Was
there a virus? Did they lose their
fertility? The microplastics in the
testicles, right? No, it's people are
having less kids because they're
choosing to have less kids, right? Women
have gotten emancipation, independence
in the workforce, and they're making
more money. Um, people don't need kids
as insurance policies. They have less
kids. Maybe they're living hedonistic
lives. God bless them, right? They want
to have more fun. They want to have less
kids. I don't see the act of choosing to
have less kids as a problem. Okay, so
let's move one level up. Uh it's because
of retirees. It's because a large
percentage of the population is
essentially retiring at the guaranteed
age of 65 or 70 thanks social security.
And so they need other people to pay for
it. They need more workers in the
workforce. And if the workforce is
shrinking, then you have a small number
of people Exactly. who are supporting a
large number of retirees. And in
democracies, you can't take pensions
away. The voters vote you out. So they
slowly strangle the economy. So what do
you do? Then you have a bunch of
immigration and then the whole culture
changes. You end up in a low trust
society and people start fighting over
limited resources and how do you control
which immigrants come in and how do you
make sure that they're good taxpayers
after they're in and so on.
So you end up with in in kind of this
trap where the low fertility rate is
upstream of the downstream problems that
are cultural and societal.
But I'm not sure that you're going to
solve that by making people have more
kids. How are you going to meme them
into having more kids? And I'm not even
sure it's necessarily a problem because
keep in mind, you have more resources
now. You have less of a burden. Now,
there's there's a flip side where every
kid is a lottery ticket and an
invention. So, there's some benefit to
having more kids, but you can't you
can't force it.
I think it'll work itself out, right?
The Scott Adams has this great law which
calls the Adams law of slowmoving
disasters. When disasters are very slowm
moving like peak oil or global warming
or population collapse and everyone can
kind of see them coming economics and
society as a force solve them because
enough individual people has incentives
to go solve them.
So I don't know exactly how it gets
solved but I think it could get solved
in various ways. Uh, one example could
be um, you know, maybe people retire
later. Maybe AI and automation and
robots take care of the older people.
Maybe we figure out how to have
immigrants while still keeping a high
trust society. We kind of put more rules
around immigration that protect some of
the high trust benefits. Maybe we
outsource more things. Maybe we just,
you know, have more land and housing to
go around. Believe me, if we were having
too many kids, everybody complain about
how there's no housing and there's no
land, right? So they'll always find
something to care about. So, I just
don't view this as like a thing that any
individual or government action is going
to solve. I think economics and
incentives over time will solve it. And
I'm not even convinced it's like that
big of a problem.
Is there anything that you do think is a
it may be selfcorrecting too, which is
that if there are too few kids in
society and the returns to having kids
literally might just go up. It might
just be easier to have
the incentive to now have a child
because there's so few around, they're
going to get the best job. They're going
to have opportunity resources. It's like
everyone wants to everyone's
I suppose if you could come at it from a
pain side which is you look at all of
the other people around who don't have
kids. Let's say that um pensions
completely drop off and the only way
that old people are able to survive is
if their children pay them some sort of
stipend like reverse you know send send
money back up the generations. You go
okay well that's a pretty [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] good
incentive.
That's a good incentive. I also think
that people have been me'd into thinking
that uh kids make your life worse and
that's a that's a pretty pretty bad
what's your experience been? Kids make
your life better in every possible way.
If you want to if you want an automatic
built-in meaning to life, have kids. Uh,
and I think there are these bad psych
studies, like most psych studies,
unfortunately, that say that people are
unhappy when they have kids. Yeah, it's
because you're catching in the middle of
changing a diaper and you're saying
like, "Are you glad you had kids or
not?" Or or they don't even say that.
They say, "Are you happy or not?" And
they say, "No, I'm not happy right now."
But what they don't realize is that
person has found something more
important than being happy in the
moment. They found meaning. And the
meaning comes from kids. And if you ask
parents, do you regret having kids? I
think it would be 99 to1 against, you
know, it would be, "No, I don't regret
having kids. I love having kids. I'm so
glad I had kids." It's it's incredibly
rare to meet a parent that regretted
having children.
It's pretty good odds.
It's it's extremely good odds. And I
think so I think I think a lot of people
get late into life and uh you know, then
they can't admit that they didn't want
kids that that that they should have had
kids. It's kind of late in the game. Um,
but you know, a lot of times you see
everybody who has a pet, right? Uh, and
they're pushing them around in a
stroller, right? What is that? That's a
sublimated desire for children.
Yeah. Uh, Malcolm Collins says that uh,
having a pet is to children is using
porn is to sex. He basically thinks that
it's sort of a surrogate.
It It's definitely in that direction.
And, you know,
I like pets. I like animals. I don't but
I don't like the idea of like neutering
or spaying something and then keeping it
as a prisoner in the house and having to
train it. You know, it's just I don't
want to be responsible for that.
Given that you've been thinking more
about child rearing kids, what do you
hope that your kids learn from their
childhood?
They should just be happy and do what
they want. I don't I don't I don't have
particular goals in mind for them. I
think that's a that's another route to
unhappiness. Having
That's different though, right? Than
learn versus goals. It's not necessarily
what do they want? What what do you want
them to want out of life? Like what is
it that you had that idea around your
number one job as a parent is to provide
unconditional love to your kids.
Yeah, that's it.
Right. So I can be loved or I am loved
unconditionally. Is that one of the
things?
I want my kids to feel unconditionally
loved and I want them to have high
As a consequence of that,
but I don't get to choose any All I get
to choose is my output. I can output
love. I can't choose what they feel. I
can't choose how they behave. I can't
choose what they want. I can't choose
what they turn out to be.
And downstream from that, there should
be freedom. There should be a degree of
freedom that comes from the self-esteem
that comes from the unconditionality.
They should make their own mistakes and
learn their own lessons and uh have
their own desires and fulfill them as is
appropriate. Uh I like any parent, I
wouldn't want them to be hurt. I
wouldn't want them to be unhappy. But I
cannot control these things.
Uh you replied to my friend Rob
Henderson. He was talking about um how
kids fall asleep more quickly when
they're being carried and uh you said
cry it out and co-sleeping is dangerous.
What's IYI science? IY is Nim TB. He
talk about intellectual yet idiot. These
are people who are overeducated and they
deny like basic common sense.
Uh so there's a lot of that that goes on
in child rearing uh thanks to really bad
studies uh and and bad public medical
directives. So, for example, you know,
uh a few uh a few parents you maybe
they're drunk or they're high or they're
just other issues and you know, they
roll over their kid when they're
sleeping, the kid suffocates or they
neglect their kid and then
is that co-sleeping having them in the
bed.
Yeah. Exactly. Or or there, you know,
the the modern proclamation. And so,
because of that, they say, "Well, don't
co-sleep with your kids." Well, the kids
in every society through all of human
history co-slept with their parents.
Where else do you think they were
sleeping? They weren't houses in
multiple rooms. Yeah. Exactly. Put in
the other tent. We'll put It's just
nonsense. Co-sleeping has been around
since the dawn of time. So has uh
feeding kids cow milk when or goat milk
when breast milk is runs out or is not
available. Um yet we're told formula,
you know, made with soy and and and corn
syrup, which was invented recently, is
somehow better than uh cow milk. And cow
milk can be dangerous for your kids and
co-sleeping is dangerous for your kids
and cry it out is the right answer. All
of that is nonsense. I mean, it's very
clear that um we raise children
throughout human history without uh
these interventions. And and to me, the
idea that like you're going to let your
kid cry it out, I get why that's done
for practical reasons so that you know
you can get some sleep and you can go to
work in the morning, but the reality is
when you let the kid cry it out, you're
letting the kid ball until it finally
gives up. I mean, the kid left by itself
to cry it out in the wild. It's going to
get it's going to get eaten, right? It's
going to get eaten by a tiger. Um, so
this kid is starting off on the wrong
foundation. The the one I mentioned
earlier about the idea that babies don't
feel pain. Like that's ludicrous, right?
I've never heard that before. That's
such a wild idea.
Yeah, I'm not saying that's 100% true. I
read it on
the child in the cheek quite hard. And
that's an academy. I read it on Twitter
and I did one level confirmation on it,
but it's so ludicrous that I should
probably do two or three level
confirmations on it before I talk about
Um, but there are definitely some people
who believe that there enough that it
was a thing. um in certain circles for a
while. But I think we just go through
these, you know, the these IYI beliefs,
these intellectual beliefs come from
people who uh take a little bit of
knowledge and extrapolate it too far.
They think we know more than we know due
to recent scientific studies and these
are junk science. These are low power
studies on uh you know on very certain
contexts that then get over applied.
Behavioral psych is very guilty of this
but it's true across a lot of science.
Um, so even with science, you have to be
skeptical. You have to look very
carefully at, you know, does it apply in
the right context or not? Is it come
from good sources? Did they run enough
high-powered studies widely accepted?
And there are a whole bunch of things
you're just not supposed to talk about.
You're not supposed to say like you
don't say like you you can you can't say
anything negative about vaccines because
god forbid what if they don't get the
polio vaccine, right? And that's part of
the reason why the recent vaccine debate
because we've taken our worship for
vaccines too far because we don't want
people to not take non-essential
vaccines. So it gets overdone. So the
same way there's this whole SIDS thing,
sudden infant death syndrome, right?
It's like no, there's kids don't
suddenly mysteriously die. Like more
likely there was neglect or there was a
problem and then whoever was the
caretaker doesn't want to admit to the
problem or didn't recognize the problem,
but kids don't just spontaneously die in
the crib, right? Um so they talk about
swaddling babies. You swaddle babies,
you know, basically tie them up, mummify
them. Uh so you constrict them so they
die of SIDS where they roll over and
they can't get back. I mean, it's just
all this craziness around fundraising.
It's a real minefield.
It's a minefield. And and and you know,
you have these scared parents or having
a kid for the first time and they open a
book and they start reading how to raise
children when I would argue that your
natural instincts on what to do with
your child
uh are actually pretty good. It It's
funny when uh my wife and I had our
first baby. I remember, you know, at the
hospital,
sorry, the first one was natural birth
um at the birthing center. We we went
home. I was like, "There you go. That's
it." And we're like, what do we do?
Where's the instruction manual? You take
them home
and then you relax and you realize
actually
instincts are pretty good. You know, if
the kid cries, check to see if they
clean, feed them, all that. It's like
your your basic instincts are actually
very very good. And kids instincts are
actually very very good. They know what
they want and they want things for a
reason
and they can encourage you to give it to
them.
Yes. It's usually it children are not
deficient adults who can't reason. Uh
and to some extent that's true but
mostly it's not true. Mostly they have
very good reasons for what they want and
you as a parent mostly have
communication problems with them. They
can't yet communicate to you. You can't
communicate to them. They can't
communicate to you. So early on with my
kids, I tried to focus on teaching them,
you know, basic explanatory theories as
opposed to having them memorize things.
That's just the most
the most nol solution.
I'll give you I'll give you a very
simple example,
right? Okay. So this is Twitter and this
is this is the how to get rich without
getting lucky thread. So the first one
well a simple one is you know how does
knowledge get created? If you follow the
critical rationalism David Deutsch
philosophy, then it's by guessing and
then by testing your guesses. So
whenever they ask me something like,
well, why do you think that is? Well,
how would we figure out if that's true?
Right? So that's a basic game you can
play
involving them.
Involving them. But another one is that
a lot of the rules that you teach kids
have to do with hygiene, right? You must
brush your teeth, you know, cover your
mouth when you cough. Um, you know,
clean up after yourself. Don't touch
that. Wash your hands after you do this.
um don't eat food off the floor, right?
But all of these are subsumed under the
germ theory of disease, right? So if you
instead go on YouTube and show them
videos of germs or if you have them look
under a microscope at anything, they're
like, "Ah, they can infer what's going
Yeah, there's creepy crawies everywhere
and I got to watch out for them." Uh and
then, you know, you can talk about how
if you look at humans, like our real
enemy are pathogens. I think a lot of
aging and disease are actually
downstream of our competition with
pathogens over time. uh to a point that
people still don't fully appreciate. Um
there's a red queen hypothesis which is
that we undergo sexual selection to mix
up our genes. And so every 20 years,
every generation, mix up your genes. But
if you look at how bacteria and viruses
mutate through just random mutations,
their mixup rate on their genes and
evolution rate is roughly the same as
ours. Even though they go through
thousands of generations those 20 years
because they're not doing sexual
selection, they're doing asexual
replication, mutation, their their
evolutionary rate is roughly equivalent
to ours. So we're in a red queen race
where we're both running at roughly the
same speed using very different
strategies.
But a lot of how we're involved is
around pathogens. Like our immune system
is one of the most expensive things to
run in the body is so much as about
immune system optimization. That's about
pathogens. junk DNA in bacteria and
crisper was discovered because in
bacteria their DNA is evolved to fight
viruses and the way it does that is by
taking viral DNA and snipping it up
every time there's a viral attack and
storing it in their own DNA so they have
a copy so they can recognize it next
time it attacks and you know and so on.
Um a lot of the population structure of
species uh determines how long their
lifespans are. So very uh so if if in a
given species there's a very high rate
of infection then you'll have these
older members of the population are
carrying diseases that will then infect
the young. So it's important for that
species to get rid of the old faster. So
the higher the disease rate in a given
population, the less long live the
entire population. So the older ones
don't infect the younger ones. That's a
hypothesis and I think it's true. It's
an interesting hypothesis. um uh
homeostasis within the human body, how
we're always returning to a given level
of things like that's a that's a
fundamental part of our makeup, our
temperature, pH, blood pressure, and so
on under homeostasis. But if you if you
engage in any kind of signaling like you
take a peptide for example, that's a
signaling molecule. You take a hormone
externally, the body will counteract it.
You take testosterone, the body will
counteract will downregulate its own
production very fast. Uh and the body
releases its own hormones in pulses
rather than steady state. Why is that?
Well, that's because uh bacteria and
viruses can infect your body and trick
your body. They can take it over. Like
toxoplasmosis does this, rabies does
this. They take over macroscopic
structure, structural bodies.
And small bacteria and viruses would
hack our bodies and literally take them
over if we didn't have defense
mechanisms. And one of those defense
mechanisms is homeostasis. Anytime you
see something getting out of whack, you
immediately push back really hard on it
because like, did I just get infected?
Is something trying to take me over?
It's also why hormones get released in
pulses at night rather than in steady
state low levels because uh enemy
bacteria can release toxins or the same
signaling molecules in small quantities
but they can't pulse. They can't
coordinate to pulse.
So your body can coordinate to pulse as
a macroscopic object but microscopic
objects can't coordinate to create the
same pulses.
Oh that's cool.
Yeah. So there's all I mean
so you know that it's coming from you.
Is that why?
Correct. It's endogenous rather than
exogenous.
So I never knew that. And that's why we
resist a lot of exogenous treatments. A
lot of our medical treatments don't
work. Um anyway, so this these are
there's there's a bunch more I could go
on, but I think that a lot of uh you
know, you see this in cancers where uh a
lot of uh bacteria show up like the
Epstein bar virus shows up in a lot of
cancers and um you know, now it seems
like the gut microbiome influences so
many things. Basically uh bacteria and
viruses are at the top of the food chain
compared to us. Like we are top of the
well-known food chain, but bacteria and
viruses eat us. Fungus eats us. So these
microscopic predators are our natural
predators. And so a lot of aging,
societal structure, hygiene, religious
strictctures against pork, you know,
circumcision, all of these things. These
are all designed to resist bacteria and
viruses. So if you can teach children
this philosophy at an early age, you
shortcut all the debates.
How effective have you been at teaching
that philosophy to children?
That one, I think I've been pretty
effective. I've drilled that one at
home. The one I haven't quite gotten
around to yet is evolution. Like I'm
starting to do little bits of that, you
know, like we came from monkeys. What
does that mean?
Um, already got them thinking about some
of the deeper questions. I did ask my,
you know, young son like uh, you know,
can nothing exist? I thought that was a
fun question. So, I like to throw a fun
question.
How old is he now? Like four, three.
No, no, he's he's eight.
Oh, right. An 8-year-old and a
six-year-old. So, I asked them both
like, "Can nothing exist?" And they had
pretty good answers, right? Um, another
one we played with the other day was
like, "What is the matrix?"
Okay. Uh, you know, what is what is
this? What is all this? Um, I just find
it and it's entertaining. It's just fun
to talk about, right? To talk about
these questions with your kids. I'm not
saying that one is a good way of child
raising. It's not leading to any deeper
learning other than maybe just have them
start uh or continue to question the
basic structure of reality and not move
past it so quickly. also to take joy.
You know what's the meta lesson that's
being taught there? Dad
dad spends time asking questions to
which there are not necessarily an
answer because there is something
enjoyable in the process of learning and
trying to decipher what's happening
possibly. Also, dad tries not too hard
to teach people things. I don't want to
be I don't want to be didactic.
He helps them to arrive at it.
Yeah. Correct. Correct. Dad Dad is here
to help you solve problems when you have
problems and you constantly have
problems. So if you come to dad, dad can
help explain to you how he would solve
the problem. But most of the time they
don't want that. Most of the time they
just want most of the time they just
want me to solve the problem, right? So
sometimes they have to play it dumb.
It's like why is my Wi-Fi not working on
my computer? I'm like I don't know. Did
you click on that thing?
Look, you've got like a rebellious
sovereign child. Sovereign as they may
be, but sometimes they still need the
dad to step in.
So in addition to feeling loved and
having high self-esteem, I think the
most important trait that would be nice
to not rob them of is agency. I want
them to preserve their agency. They're
born naturally agentic and willful, but
a lot of child raising can beat that out
of them by essentially domesticating
them. That's right.
And I would rather have wild animals and
wolves than have well-trained dogs
because I'm not going to be around to
take care of them.
Yeah. So, they're going to have to be
able to look after themselves.
Exactly. Yeah. A friend of mine, uh,
Parsa on, uh, on Air Chat, uh, he had a
great saying. He said, uh, he wants his,
uh, children to be quick to learn and
hard to kill.
thought that was pretty good.
Yeah,
that was cool. I remember you saying
just thinking about sort of future and
culture and stuff like that. I remember
you saying that the left had won the
culture war and now they're just driving
around shooting the survivors,
After the last 6 months of change that
we've seen and sort of where we're at at
the moment, what do you think the future
of the culture war looks like?
It's not over yet. Um, they definitely
won earlier rounds. They took over
institutions. I think now it's much more
of a fair fight. Um where you have
people like Elon, you know, kind of
supporting uh so so there there's these
different forces through history, right?
Historians will argue about this. Uh but
there's a theory of the great man of
history thing where it's like oh you
have the Einsteins, you have the Teslas,
you have the um the Jangaskhans and the
Caesars, right? They determine the flow
of history. And then there's the other
uh point of view that no there are these
massive forces at play you know
demographics and geography and so on and
then the particular great man doesn't
matter they just come and go Napoleon
doesn't matter they would have been
somebody else uh the specific names are
not important and because of kind of the
leftist turn that our institutions took
in the last few uh decades they now only
subscribe to the great forces theory of
history not the great man theory of
history but I think now we're seeing the
two play out where you're seeing you
know Trump and Elon and other
individuals is rising up and saying no,
we resist.
Yeah, that's interesting.
And um I think that unfortunately
and so the battle between kind of these
these these collectivists and great
forces versus individuals, it's as old
as humanity itself. And and it is
fundamental to the species. We are not a
completely individualistic species. You
know, no man is an island. A single
person can't do anything by themselves.
But we're also not a Borg. We're not a
beehive. We're not an ant colony. We're
not all just drones marching along. So,
which is it? We we're somewhere in the
middle. And the human race is always
kind of bouncing between the two. We
like strong leaders. We like to be led.
Um we like to coordinate our forces and
and and mass and and do things. Uh but
at the same time, we're also all
individuals and willing to break away
and willing to do our own thing and
everyone's always fighting to be a
leader and there's always status games
going on. So, u we're there's a pendulum
that's always swinging back and forth.
And in modern economics, the way that
manifests is between sort of Marxism and
capitalism, right? Marxism is like from
each according to his ability to each
according to his needs. We're all equal.
There's a millennial project. We're all
going to be equal in the end. And and
you know, don't try and stand out, but
do what's good for everybody. Um, and
there's a religious aspect to it. And
then the the capitalist individualist is
like libertarian. Every man for himself.
You just each do what you want and it'll
work out for the greater good. That's
Adam Smith. You know, the invisible hand
of the market will feed you. the baker
should bake and the butcher should
butcher and the candlestick maker should
make candlesticks and it'll all work
out. Each person does their best and
they trade and so which is it which
which which theory is correct and I
think there's always going to be a
battle between the two and
I think
the interesting thing is what's going on
there's a modern flavor to it which
changes it. The modern flavor is that
the individual is getting more powerful
because they're becoming more leverage.
So someone like an Elon Musk can have
the leverage of tens of thousands of
brilliant engineers and producers
working for him. He can have factories
of robots manufacturing things. He can
have hundreds of billions of dollars of
capital behind him and he can project
himself through media to hundreds of
millions of people. That is more power
than any individual could have had
historically. So the great men of
history are becoming greater.
That said, that same leverage is
increasing the gap between the halves
and have nots. So in the wealth game,
more people are winning overall and the
average is going up. But in the status
game, there are essentially more losers.
There are more invisible men and women
who are getting nothing out of life and
have no leverage. Relatively speaking.
Objectively speaking, they might be
better off. They still have phones and
they still have TVs and they're not
absolutist creatures though. We're
relative creatures.
Correct. And so to the extent that we're
relatives creatures, there are more
losers than winners. And in a democracy,
those people will outnumber the winners
and they will vote the winners down.
Yep. Um, and so that's the battle that
kind of goes on and the democracy has
gotten very broad. And so one of my
other quips is that um it's not the
right to vote that gives you power, it's
power that gives you the right to vote.
So we've confused the two. So what
happened was, you know, voting started
as a way for people who had power to
divide up the power, not fight amongst
themselves. The winners of the
revolution, the winners of the war, the
people in the House of Lords and the
House of Commons, they divide up power
amongst themselves. to say, "Hey, we
have all the money. We have the power.
We are the knights. We have the swords.
We have the warriors. We could kill
everybody, but we don't want to just
fight each other all day long. We don't
have to be Game of Thrones forever. So,
we're going to divide up power by voting
among ourselves." But then, as society
goes on and becomes more and more
peaceful, that franchise for voting gets
spread. It gets spread to people who
don't have land, who don't have power,
who may not be able to inflict physical
violence. And then eventually, you get
to the point where everybody's voting.
Everybody's voting. and everybody was
voting for candy and fairies and you
know all the free things in life.
Uh and then eventually people start
voting to oppress each other. The 51% in
in any domain vote to oppress the 49s,
the tyranny, the majority. But not all
of them are willing to back that up with
physical power. And so you can end up in
a situation where people who don't have
physical power are using the
institutions of the state to control the
people who do have physical power. as a
simple example taking the United States
the people who don't have guns voting to
disarm the people that do have guns
right well if the people who do have
guns get coordinated and care enough you
can't do that right so I think
eventually these societal structures are
unstable they break down and they break
down because eventually the people who
have the power and say no wait a minute
you don't get to vote you you only got
to vote because you had power and now
you don't have power and you're somehow
trying to vote
all of nature all of society all of
capitalism all of human endeavors are
underpinned by physical violence. And
that is very hard truth to swallow and
hard to get away from. Nature is read in
tooth and claw. If you don't fight, you
don't survive. You don't live, you die.
And that's true of everything alive
And humans are no different. So giving
up physical power and then thinking you
can exercise political power fails.
Which is why every communist revolution,
which is all about equality and kumbaya
and brothers and sisters, end up being
run by a bunch of thugs. Because if you
don't have a way to divide up the wealth
based on merit, then it's always going
to be based on power and influence. The
thugs with the guns always win in the
end. So the question is just can you
keep the thugs and the with the guns
paid and happy and successful society
where you're allocating based on merit
because if you can't then you do it
based on power. So I do think that this
battle is not over but that's because it
it never stopped. It's always been there
from day one. It will continue. Is it a
battle to not care about the news in an
age of news saturation? All of this
stuff, headlines 24 hours a day,
streamed directly into your
consciousness through a device in your
pocket. You know, a lot of what we've
spoken about today is freedom. Freedom
from having to think about things or
care about things that you do not have
control over or that you shouldn't or
that you don't want to. And yet people
are just like submerged up to the bottom
of their nostrils basically drowning in
worry. So how Yeah. Is it is it a battle
to sort of stay out of the news when
you're saturated in it?
Yeah. I mean, as you're saying, the
human brain has not evolved to handle
all the world's emergencies breaking in
real time and you can't care about
everything and you'll go insane if you
try. Um, doesn't mean you shouldn't care
at all. There's no should. I mean, if
you want to care, go ahead and care. I
would just say that you're probably
better off only caring about things that
are local or things that you can affect.
So, if you really care about something
that's in the news, then by all means
care about it, but make a difference. Go
do something about it. uh and make sure
that it's your overwhelming desire and
you don't have five other desires at the
same time. Um also just realize the
consequences of it. You're going to be
unhappy until that thing gets fixed and
that thing will often be out of your
control.
Desire is a contract to be unhappy until
you get what you want. But exactly for
the most part that's something that is
in your life. It's like till I lose the
weight until I get the job.
Outside too. Yeah. If it's until the
carbon dioxide parts per million are
below this particular number. It's like
that's a that's a tough one. Or all the
people with Trump derangement syndrome,
right? He's living rentree in their
heads and driving them insane. And I get
it. I mean, there are politicians who
have definitely driven me insane as
well. Um, but it comes at a very high
cost and is something that is out of
your control that you cannot really
influence.
Um, so it's probably good to at least be
conscious of it.
You mentioned uh historians before. One
of my friends has a a question, his
equivalent of uh Peter Thiel's question
of uh what is it that you believe that
most people would disagree with? His is
what do you think is currently ignored
by the media but will be studied by
historians?
You're asking me that question right
now. What do I think is ignored by the
media but will be studied by historians?
Well, I mean
the media is only focused on
very timely things, right? So, it
depends if you want to talk about timely
or timeless, right?
But as a as a simple example, if I just
look at things that maybe the next five
or 10 years that are going to make a
massive difference that people are not
focused enough on.
Um, and I think within two years this
will be obvious. So, like they make a
prediction and predictions are tough,
but and I have to eat it in a few years.
Yeah, I'm going have to eat eat this in
a few years. So, I'm probably wrong, but
uh two things that I pay attention to um
that I don't think uh a lot of people do
pay attention to. Well, there's a
couple. One is I think just how bad
modern medicine is. I think people just
put a lot more faith in modern medicine
than is warranted. Like our best ideas
for a lot of things are surgery, just
cutting things out, right? Uh treating
things that are extraneous like, oh, you
don't really need a gallbladder, you
don't really need an appendix or you
don't really need tonsils. Oh, that's
false. every the surplus requirement.
Human body is very very efficient. All
those things are needed. Um you know so
I think I think the state of modern
medicine is still pretty bad. We don't
have many good explanatory theories in
biology. Um we have germ theory disease.
We have um evolution, we have uh cell
theory, we have DNA genetics, um
morphogenesis, embryogenesis and not
much else. You know there's not much
else. Everything else is rules of thumb
memorization. A affects B because
affects C affects D but we don't
understand the underlying explanation.
It's all just words pointing to words
pointing to words. So biology is still
in a very sorry state and because we are
not allowed to take risk that might kill
people. Um we just don't experiment
enough in biology. So a lot of
treatments are just outright banned by
large regulatory bodies. So we just
don't have the innovation. So I think
we're still in the stone age when it
comes to biology and we got a long ways
to go. Uh, and I think people will look
back agast at this. And I think this is
Brian Johnson's point. He's like, you
know, let's be more more extreme. Let's
try to live forever. We must be more
experimental. And I'll start as end of
one and start experimenting on myself.
um, but even there, I disagree with
Brian in many things like, you know,
taking huge amounts of supplements. I
think we just don't know supplements
outside of their natural context like
just eat liver, man. Right. Um, but
that's fine. And and I wouldn't be vegan
either, but you know, it's it's I I
really appreciate that he's
experimenting. He's good naturatured
about he shares everything. So we need
more people like that.
Um so I think the state of biology
people will look back and say wow that
was in the dark ages.
Um I think uh another uh another thing
that we'll look back on is I think we we
still continue to underestimate how
important drones are going to be in
warfare. The future of all warfare is
drones. There will be nothing else on
the battlefield. Um because I think of
the end state of drones as autonomous
bullets. Not even guided autonomous like
they're self-directed. Uh, and so if
that's the future we're headed towards,
and that's a it is dist.
Why would you have an armed force that's
there's going to be no there's there's
going to be no aircraft carriers,
there's going to be no tanks, there's
going to be no infantry men, there's
just going to be autonomous bullets. Buy
autonomous bullets against your
autonomous bullets. Whichever ones win,
the other side just surrenders cuz it's
over. Um, I think that's the second
piece of it. I think a a third piece
that is going to be uh kind of
unexpected is the GLP1s, which I know
you and I have privately discussed
before. I think these are the most
breakthrough drugs since antibiotics.
Um, they're probably more important than
statins. They're sort of miracle drugs.
They seem to the there there are
downsides, but the downsides and side
effects are so minor compared to the
upsides beyond just weight loss. Um,
they also seem to be addiction breakers.
They seem to lower many kinds of cancer.
They almost metabolically reverse aging
up to a certain point. Um, and I think
they're going to bend the curve on
health care costs. And uh the big
question people are going to be asking
over the next 5 years is why are
Americans paying thousands of dollars a
month for this when people overseas are
getting them for free or I can order
them from China for free or whatever. Um
and maybe it like if I were Bernie
Sanders the platform I would be running
on is I would say okay we're going to
pay you know hundreds of billions of
dollars to Novo and Eli Liy and we're
just going to make these free or there's
hundreds of analoges of these things
that work. These are not going to be,
you know, limited to just the few that
are that are being used today. Just take
one of them or two of them, make them
free,
and I think it'll make a big difference.
And,
uh, as you and I were discussing
earlier, uh, this does bend a lot of
people out of shape who got there the
oldfashioned way, and they want to see
obesity as a moral failing on people's
parts and it lowers their status
if they are suddenly
signal is less of a signal. Yeah.
Correct. Absolutely. Yeah. So, so
they're incented to say, "Oh, well, you
don't know the downsides." it's, you
know, it's irresponsible to suggest it's
going to cause cancer. Have fun losing
bone and muscle mass. But none of that
stuff is really true. The cancer stuff
is actually beneficial on. I know people
who are now taking these things for
anti-aging reasons. Um, they're already
fit, but they just want to age better
and have a stronger insulin metabolism.
Um, and there's evidence now these
things are, you know, they put off
dementia, Alzheimer's, colon cancer.
It's insane. Cardiovascular disease,
like the the list of benefits is insane.
There's no free lunch. But
this is a class of drugs that prevents
you from taking other drugs into your
body. It prevents you from taking uh you
know too much sugar, too many calories
in an era of abundance, prevents you
from smoking, prevents you from even uh
there's an organization called Casper
that is now doing a study on heroin
addictions and they're showing that this
can lower opioid overdoses and heroin
addiction. So there's a lot of
overwhelming medical evidence coming out
and I think I don't I don't know the
exact number but I think something like
10% of the population might not have
tried these things.
I think that's the number that I' seen
as well.
It's massive.
I think it's about 50% of the population
say that they would like to try it.
Exactly. So uh I think the body
positivity movement is dead and we
always kind of knew it was a scam.
I mean it's dying very very quickly.
Yeah. Equipped like you can never be too
rich, too thin or too clean, right? And
immediately like a whole bunch of people
went nonlinear my mention like what do
you mean too thin and what about the
hygiene hypothesis and you know
obviously there's always exceptions but
people want to be thin and fit and
people want to be clean back to the
pathogen discussion that we had.
Um so I think overall that there's going
to be huge demand for these things and
our modern medical system is not built
to supply these. Well, I'm not I'm not I
don't hold it against the phases. I
think the farmers did their job by
creating the thing, but I think next we
need to step up and figure out how to
make it broadly and cheaply available as
opposed to just milk it for only for,
you know, people on obesity who can get
Medicare to sign off for it or people
paying out of pocket at very very high
prices.
Um the the benefits of societal
distribution of the safer GLP ones is so
large that whichever politicians uh
tackles that is going to be richly
rewarded. Well, obesity is the number
one source of malnutrition worldwide.
There's twice as many people that are
obese than are starving. So about half a
billion people are starving in a
billion.
So many problems are downstream of that.
Like you know, look at how much of the
federal budget goes into diialysis
because of kidney failure. And why is
that? It's because of diabetes, right?
So so many of the problems that we have
in modern society are downstream of
obesity. And you know this like fitness
is so important. Uh and yes, there's in
some people these things call mus cause
muscle and bone loss, but not in the
people who are eating high protein and
working out hard. So it they can be
taken a way that's safer. And some
versions of these like literal glutai,
the original one, they've been around
for decades, and the others have been
around for about a decade. So and we
already have, as you said, 10% of the
population taking them. So they're
already quite widely distributed.
A good sample size.
Yeah, it's a great sample size. What
more do you need? Like if if you if you
have a bacterial infection that's eating
you, I don't say, "Oh, I have this
antibiotic, but it's going to raise your
blood pressure." It's like, "No, take
the antibiotic." If you're going to kill
yourself, I say, "Take this
antisycchotic and stay alive a little
longer and solve it." I don't say, "Oh,
it's going to, you know, cause your
heart rate to go up by three beats a
minute. I don't worry about that." So
similarly, if you're poisoning yourself
with toxins and overuse of substances
that you shouldn't be using, either
heroin, alcohol, cigarettes, sugar, or
just sheer calories, um, take this GLP1.
Uh, they also improve digestion. You
just have less cal, just less food
matter going through your stomach. They
lower cancer risks across the board.
There's quite a few cancers that lower.
Um, cardiovasc I mean, I don't know what
else to tell you. I've been very
surprised by the negative reception
whenever you have a conversation about
GLP1s and I think a lot of it may be
people who and and well think about how
many sacred cows are being gored right
all the people who are basically saying
uh you should work harder you should be
fit like I did right it's lowering their
status think about all the nutritionists
and doctors and trainers who are now
being you know it's too easy they're
being put out of business in a way right
uh it's kind of like why does the
American military keep buying aircraft
carriers, right? In the age of drones,
um there's an incentive bias. There's a
very strong motivated reasoning. Uh but
it doesn't matter. 10% people are on it.
Uh everybody wants to be fit. It's going
to spread like wildfire. M we I was just
thinking as you were talking that you
know when we think about health and a
lot of people kind of get captured by
the way that they were brought up the
the the habits that they had from their
childhood or what mom and dad did or
genetic predisposition and stuff like
that. I think um you have as many
reasons as as many people to sort of
feel hard done by by challenges that you
had earlier on in in your life. Is
getting past your past a skill? Sort of
not being owned today by your history.
Sort of not having that victimhood
mentality. Yeah, I I did have a uh tough
childhood, but I don't think about it.
You know, I I think there are a couple
of things going on there. One is I did
process it quite a bit. I thought about
it, but I thought about it to get rid of
it. I didn't think about it to dwell on
it or to like indulge.
Yeah. I wanted to be successful. I
wanted more than anything else to rise
past that. And so I couldn't have that
as a burden on me. So I had to get rid
of it. So to the extent that I dealt
with it, it was to it was for the
express purpose of getting rid of it,
not to create an identity or story or to
reflect upon it or to say look at me,
look at what I've accomplished and look
how great I am and what I've done. So I
got rid of it and I think at some point
you you wrestle with that thing and then
you just realize like you're never going
to untangle the whole thing. It's a
Gordian knot problem. uh like Alexander
you know found that tangled knot in
India and uh they said oh the famous
conqueror will come and will untie this
knot nobody else can untie the knot and
he took one look at it pulled out a
sword and just cut it. So at some point
you just have to cut your past if your
past is bothering you you will
eventually get tired of trying to
untangle that knot and you will just
drop it because you will realize life is
short and the more you have more you
want to accomplish in this life actually
the less time you have to unravel that
thing. So I just wanted to actually get
things done. So I had no time to deal
with it. So I just cut it. It's like a
really bad relationship. But in this
case, it's a bad relationship with your
own history. So you just drop it.
Yeah. I think you know so much of what
we've spoken about today is on the
shortness of life and uh the fact that
every moment is precious. You had to
take about um that the most fundamental
resource in your life is not time, it's
attention.
That's right. I used to think, you know,
the currency of life, right? People
think it's money and yes, money is
important and it does let you trade
certain things for time, but it doesn't
really buy you time. Ask Warren Buffett
how much time money can buy you or
Michael Bloomberg. They're, you know,
rich as Scrooge and and Chris, but they
can't buy more time, right? Brian
Johnson, notwithstanding.
Um, so you can't trade money for time.
Money is not the real currency of life.
time itself doesn't even mean that much
because as we talked about before, a lot
of time can be wasted because you're not
really present for it. You're not paying
attention. So the real currency of life
is attention. It's what you choose to
pay attention to and and and what you do
about it. And so back to the point about
the news media, you can put your
attention on the news, but that's how
you're spending the real currency of
life. So just be aware of that. If you
want to, that's fine. There's no there's
no right or wrong here. Like maybe it is
your destiny to pick something in the
news, learn about that problem, adopt
that problem, and solve it. But just be
careful because your attention is the
only thing that you have
and that can also be captured by your
own past. It
Yes. You can fritter it away on anything
you like.
Is there an advantage to starting out as
a loser?
Uh absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. cuz if you're
because if you're a loser then you'll
want to be a winner and then you'll
develop all the characteristics that
will help you be a you know quote
unquote winner in life. That said, I
wouldn't sentence my kids to it. Like I
don't think you can artificially do
that. You know, it's it's sort of like
imagine that you were you know 300 years
ago you're born a surf and then somehow
you managed to escape off the farm and
you become a land owner and then
eventually you become minor nobility and
aristocrat. Are you going to put your
kids back on the farm and say you're
going to be a surf again? I know they
all like those stories. the the kids
themselves like those stories because it
says I came from the school of hard
knocks. My dad made me go shovel hay for
a summer. It's not real. I mean, you're
not going to trick them. Um I think what
you can all you can do is kind of uh
cultivate an appreciation and gratitude
for what you have. And the only way to
do that is just evidence it yourself,
right? Just show yourself how you spend
money, how you respect it, what you do
with it, how you take care of people,
who you're responsible for. and and and
the more resources you have, the greater
the tribe you can take care of. The more
of the tribe you can take care of. So
when you have no resources, you're
struggling to take care of yourself. And
at that point, it's good to be selfish
cuz you can't save somebody else if you
can't even save yourself. Yes.
So you take care of yourself and you
become the best version of yourself. But
there are too many men who are able,
fit, and have some money who are doing
nothing with their lives. They're just
sitting at home doing nothing, just
indulging in themselves. Maybe they go
on dates and they get Door Dash. Like I
have no respect for that. I think
there's nothing worse in society than a
lazy man
because he's sort of he's sort of
leaving it all on the table. He's
leaving his potential on the table. It's
bad for him. So the next thing you do is
you go and you have a family and you
take care of your family. Take care of
that tribe. Then you take care of your
extended family. You take care of your
cousins, brothers, uncles, grandmothers,
aunts, you know, sisters, everybody that
you can. And then if you have more
resources beyond that, then you go take
care of your local tribe. You take care
of your people. Um you start trying to
do some good for the world. And if you
have more resource than that, you go
take care of an even bigger tribe. And
that's how you earn both respect and
self-confidence and you live up to your
potential. So the the more you have, the
more is rightfully expected of you. And
I think it's a good compact with society
when highly capable people express and
flex that capability by giving more and
more and by doing more and more. And
society rewards them with the one thing
they can't get otherwise which is
status.
Right? So society should give you status
in exchange for it. Um, they should say,
"Okay, you did a good job. You took care
of more people than than just yourself
and just the people immediately around
you." Uh, and that's what an alpha male
to me is. An alpha male is not the one
who gets to eat first. The alpha male
eats last. The alpha male feeds
everybody else first and then gets to
eat last. And they do that out of their
own self-respect and pride. And society
rewards them by calling them an alpha
and giving them status.
I wonder whether some of the push back
that we've got against uh rich, wealthy,
powerful people is disincentivizing. Uh
it is like who was it? Zuck who you know
donated money at Zuckerberg General's
hospital and they wanted to pull his
name off of it. I mean that's
I didn't see that but that's
that kind of stuff backfires right you
you should reward people for doing
what were you saying before you don't
just need to in fact actually actively
avoid castigating people if you want
their behavior to change when they get
something wrong. Look at reinforcing it
when they get something right. It's
happening at a a societal level as well.
Correct. I mean, like the the guys who
make a lot of money and go out and buy
sports teams, I wouldn't do that, right?
But the one who goes out and builds a
hospital or builds a rocket to take
people to the moon, uh, you know, or
rescue some astronauts, you should be
rewarding him for that.
Naval, I really appreciate you. Uh, I
hope that this has lived up to whatever
weird daydreams you've been having. Um,
what have you got coming up? What can
people expect from you over the next
however long?
Expect nothing.
That's the most naval way that we could
have finished this, dude. It's uh it's
been a long time coming and I really do
appreciate you for being here today.
But I do hope you deliver something.
Oh, I think you have.
So, thank you. Thanks for having me.
Thank you, too.
Thanks for getting in my mind. And
hopefully now you're out.
We'll see. Maybe even worse now you've
got the real memories to stick.
I don't know. The reason to win the game
is to be free of it. The reason The
reason to do the podcast is to be is to
be done with it.
All right. Wow. You made it to the end.
Congratulations. Well, if you enjoyed
that, you're going to love my fulllength
conversation with the one and only
Alander Boton from the School of Life
right here.
Go on.
[Music]
